https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d01f32eCtOc&t=319s

(Perhaps this needs its own article, or needs to be placed elsewhere). 

Bass is the foundation of a track. More specfically, the sub frequencies are what give the track energy and foundation. You want your sub, being your kick and bass mostly, as clear as possible. What this means is that you don't want processing on those instruments that will alter or weaken the waveform in the sub range (or at least you don't want processing on the sub frequencies of the sound). You'll also want this to be mono as stereo again makes it seem less focused and more airy/phasey.  

The problem with all that is that adding stereo, chorus, weird eq/compressor automations (see dubstep), stuff that messes with the fundamental/sub frequencies, are all very common ways to make your bass more interesting and T H I C C. But your sub will be weakened and less focused because of it.

The most common solution to this is to seperate your bass in a sub and a top layer. The top bass gets all the fx and interesting stuff, the sub bass doesn't and thus remains fully stable (and mono). 

Now, your two bass layers will still clash in the sub area as the top bass still has a (weakened) fundamental in the same spot as the sub. So you EQ out the fundamental from the top bass so that your sub essentially now acts as the fundamental of your bass. Note that you'll need to play around a bit with EQ to find a position that EQs out most of the fundamental from the top bass.

Secondly, if you have a moving bass line that goes up and down the scale a lot, chances are that your sub bass might come in range of where you rolled of the high pass EQ on your top bass. A solution is to move up the EQ to filter more sub out from the top bass but sometimes that will make the top bass lack low-end as too much gets rolled off now. Another solution is to roll of the sub bass at the point where the roll off of the top bass happens so that the sub bass, when it gets in the top bass range gets rolled off and the now the top bass is mostly in effect. Of course, then you hear mostly a slightly unstable fundamental but in most songs these notes only get hit a few times and not on the important beats or parts. Of course, play a bit with the high pass of the top bass EQ and the low pass of the sub EQ to see where the sweet spot is.

Thirdly, often the basses will sound too much as two basses instead as one cohesive bass because the sub is just a single frequency and does not have harmonics to connect with/transition in the top bass. It's the same as when a synth plays a melody line together with the main synth but a few octaves up, it does not sound as one thick sound playing a melody anymore but two sounds playing the melody. If the octaves in between would also been played, probably it would sound more like one cohesive sound as you have waveforms connecting and overlapping eachother. In the higher ups this is sometimes a choice but in bass you'll usually want it to sound like a single bass. Same as with the melody, you'll want connective tissue (frequency content), i.e. you want some extra harmonics that can bridge the gap between the very clean sub and griitty bass. To do this, you have a few options, either you can use a low-passed saw wave with a relatively but not too steep slope cut off around where the top bass begins. Or, you could saturate/distort the sub bass to give it more harmonics (making it more "sawwy") and apply the same EQ as with the saw wave. Also, note that sometimes you don't need to apply a low-pass down low as maybe nicely sculpted highs of the sub bass play well with the highs of the top bass since it becomes muddy way slower up there anyway so it's not a big deal (perhaps giving a cut in the 100-300Hz range to not stack up there then, especially for the previous paragraph issue). Also note that the top bass is also often layered with multiple top basses for more fatness and/or more interesting sound.

Lastly, realize that low-end is more than just doing this, but this will help. To make low-end sit nice and sound clean especially with kick and clean and give headroom you need good sidechaining too. Also, you don't always have to necessarily seperate your sub. E.g. if your bass is a relative simple saw wave or real bass sampler with no fx (especially no stereo-ish, eq-moving, phasey, chorusy fx), it might not be needed (though in case of a unfiltered high harmonic harsh sound like a saw you'd need to sculpt and eq the high-end to better hear the low-end and thus hear it as bass). Same with samplers, you might not need seperation on the bass (or certainly not for your demo). Often though,  you'll want to create interesting bass patches which need stereo, chorus, delay, verb, flanger, etc. to sound interesting and that's where seperation comes handy.
