# Tips & advice
This section is meant to store some general but useful tips, tricks and advice that I find while watching productions or producing myself. Usually a timestamp to the technique with a short description will suffice. Also, for tips I don't really know where to put (yet).

## Learn to hear and see sound
- Low and high (and mids) frequencies
- Plucks and sustains sound
- Harmonc content sounds
- Weak and strong sounds
- Resonances
- Clashing and masking frequencies

This is really important because being able to hear these things will make you able to make decisions whether it is in layering mixing composition and or arrangement.

For example, for a big strong kick, it's typical that the waveform is always some substantial white in the beginning (transient), possibly soft clipped or slightly higher in amplitude and then afterwards a strong loud body that doesn't decay too quickly (though the body is usually where you can decide if you want more or less body to not make kick too overpowering). A good FL Studio project example is "Umziky - all the same". Print both waveforms with and without (master) fx and you'll notice how the stock kick's transient is slightly less and how the body is not super loud relative to the transient and also decays quickly. compared to the same kick but processed. You can hear the drastic difference when you audition both. So yeah, learn to see and hear those and learn to see and hear those in real songs to know what kind of kick you need as sometimes you might need a bit less body sometimes a bit less transient (but every kick can use some beefing regardless).

Similar with hearing high and lows. Again, take the kick example. For an audible (and strong kick, your often looking for one with a good transient (and thus a good deal of high frequencies which help the transient). When auditioning kicks you'll want to be able to hear the click in the kick (though you can see the loudness transient in the waveform) vs. the boom of the low-end of the kick. You'll want to be able to hear whether the kick is a boomy low-end kick or whether it's a clicky kick or whether it has a good deal of both (maybe after slight boosting). This can also help if you want to layer kicks which is usually a high-end and a low-end, learn to hear the click high-end and then the boom low-end (same with snares). 

Same for when your analyzing tracks and/or a sound, learn to hear when a sound is harmonically rich, has a lof ot high-end or mainly has low-end (or mainly mids), again can help in layering but also in knowing how bright to make certain stuff or how much or little (due to resonances) you can use a sound. You can see some of this in an analyzer but you'll want to be able to hear it too.

Similarly with pluck and sustain sounds. Hear which sounds have a big transients, or which sounds are nothing but transients. Hear which sounds are mostly sustain. Again, so you know what kind of sounds to layer (like layer pluck with sustain but not sustain with sustain because mud unless you again choose which sound is the dominant one). A tip for hearing plucks and or transients and how much they have it is turn down the volume and see if you can still hear the click of a kick or from a sound, if not then your sound will be lacking in transients and/or highs in that transient so you might need a layer if it's important (like with the kick) or a different sound (important again for pc speakers).

For making presets, learn how squares, sines, and pulses and trinagles, and saws, and stuff sound like.

### How to layer
https://youtu.be/wMVoEBBggwE?t=862

So, layering is usually done for two things:
- To add fatness
- To add stereo
- To make a cool timbre

Sometimes it's one of those purposes, sometimes both. Either way, layering is everywhere, even in Jazz. For example, when there are certain lines played you might sometimes hear perhaps the saxophone and piano playing the same thing (melody and or chords) at the same time. This is a timbre layer since the saxophone and the piano together make for a really nice and cool timbre together that brings some spice to some melody lines and changes things up. You can also add the saxophone one octave up though then, if it's loud, it sounds less like one timbre but still it sounds like a nice layer.

An example of a fatness layer would be in a supersaw stack where you'll layer different layers with different frequency filling content to make a fat sounding sound that fills a lot of the frequency spectrum. For example, you might have a patch that is really bright and sharp and then another patch that is there to fill up the body of the sound more. That said, there usually is always a dominating and louder layer in fatness layers and the other layers are support layers.

Lastly, there are also layers to add stereo. For example, you might want to have your lead in mono but you also don't really want it to be entirely in the middle so you mix it in with a bit of a similar layer that is quite stereo and so you can make your main layer be a bit more stereo if you so desire.

#### A few notes with layering

In case of supersaws and any spectrum fill chord stacks, if you layer for fatness, it's because that is the focal point of the drop, like in future bass. A good strategy is to layer is to have different filling roles. Like some fill a bit the low-end more and others are filling the high-end more but you'll pretty much have always a single layer as the dominating layer and the other layers quieter to not clash too much and have ugly build up. No need to harsh eq either but maybe a little bit here and there to make them sit better. But yeah, usually with supersaws it's like a harsh high-end moving focused supersaw layer with a lower normallish supersaw supporting layer.

In case of the cool timbre it's often doen for like in bass or leads if you layer multiple sounds you might get a cool bass timbre and which might be fat too. In jazz there might be a cool timbre if you layer a saxophone and a piano on the melody line. Si it's not always about fatness sometimes it's about just (briefly) having a cool timbre. Also, it's common to layer some slight white noise with either leads or a supersaw depending on how big you want it and whether there is not enough in the high-end but you usually want it subtle. Other example is layering snares, get some claps with your snares or some funky sounding claps and you got a cool timbre. It also adds to the high-end (so it could be either or both functional and timbre serving) so it fills it up nicely and adds some verb with a big clap for filling up space. Last example is where you layer some pluck with a sustain, the pluck/transient to cut through and make the notes audible and the sustain for some sustain on those notes for some body (but less loud usually).

With layering, especially for creating cool timbre or cool instruments playing together, make sure that your sounds are a different timbre so they will have different harmonic content (so they won't stack too much creating mud) and or are in a different octave range, in this case you can get away maybe even with the same timbre as the range is distinct enough (especially the more octaves you go up). And again, you'll probably want to turn down in volume one layer as not both can have same space, might need a bit of eq too, however, if the octave layering is there and different timbre, you might get away with having them both reasonably loud. For the fatness you want different layers too but mainly in terms of frequency content (so an octave layer and a stereo layer) so that the timbre is still a bit similar but still not clashing. But again, analyze your favorite songs and checkout how they do layering.

Lastly, the reason we layer for fatness and why we can't do it in a single patch is because first of all, it's sometimes hard to get all the sound we want from a singly synth patch, it's too much tweaking. And for example, if we like our dominating synth patch we don't want to screw it up, we want to add to it with other synth patches so we can delete those if those were bad but sitll keep our main patch. It's like why you woulduse multiple eqs or compressors in serial, they each are dedicated to a single function and whilst sometimes you can technically do all your stuff in a single patch or eq or compressor setting, it's usually way easier to take smaller steps with multiple things in serial of layer and if you fuck up one you still have the good settings on the rest.

### Add decay on everything
You want to add a decay to your patches, especially the louder ones (often like the melody and or the chords and or the top bass). The reason is that first of all an infinite sustain sounds very unrealistic but second of all is since these sounds already play louder than rest and if they are sustained infinitely that will be an immense amount of sound and there won't be room for a lot of other stuff and listeners will be fatigued quickly too. And on top of that, it adds an extra interest when the note you're holding decays and then comes back in full force when played (or chords or whatever), like right when you're about to lose attention. This is similar with how liberate you can be with transients and percussions to fill a mix (like they are just short snappy sounds) but how careful you have to with sustain and try to make these not too loud in the mix either and or a bit on the side or try your composition to be different (again maybe the sustain needs to be on the forefront like future bass or whatever so it depends) so you have quiet sustain but some stabby sustain. Also, the decay does not need to be super quick or immediate but it's mainly for when the notes are hold longer and how long the decay is depends on your mix and stuff.

Also, for bass, especially sub bass, and maybe pads and other sounds, decay is not necessary probably since a sub is not really audible and distubring for sound and you actually need it for stability. Same with pads, they are usually quieter so it's ok for them to not have a decay (or a slow one). Again, top bass probably you do want some decay for the long notes but again this all depends but it's a good tip because often not having decays and or using too many loud sustain sounds is what crowds a mix really fast.

### Make song sections sound more coherent
So this is just general advice at all but if you struggle with coming up with a next part of your song or if certain parts of your song are incoherent even though they should be subsequent, this tip can help. Basically, you'll hear that a lot of songs going in the next part keep the same rhythm and same chord progressions however, maybe they change up a bit the rhythm of the chords whilst maintaining the beat or they make the beat a bit quieter in addition. Or, they might change up the beat but keep chords the same or change both up but keep the progression of the previous section or maybe totally switch melody but keep the rest the same. Or they might change a bit of the sound design, making it go rhytmically or openend up more or make different sounds play the same melody and harmony. Like, the point is, the way to keep stuff coherent and transition well is not have the sections not be different and often that means that if u make one thing different (like the harmony), you might wanna leave other stuff the same (like the beat but maybe quieter or whatever or more hats for interest). Again, this is not a hard and fast rule but if you struggle with jelling sections, keep it in mind that really you don't need a lot of change to add extra interest.

### Tame energy levels and boringness by (briefly) dropping rhythm and or low-end
A song is all about energy and depending on the song you'll want to distribute that energy a certain way. The only problem is that having the same energy whether that is happy or sad, is boring so you kind of want to have breaks from that. If your song is going four on the floor the whole time, there is probably the same amounts of energy going on for too long and your song will sound boring. Therefore, it's very effective to sometimes do a drum (and bass) fill and going back into rhtyhm to just briefly interrupt the monotone. Same with briefly dropping out the low-end bass and or drums (mainly the kick/snare) to kind of drop energy before going back into it. There are other types of fills too of course (like in jazz or orchestra making stuff real loud, loads of energy/energy overload briefly to go into section).

Often thougn, if fills are you're only break in energy, it's not fully enough to break the energy so to have longer interruption of monotone you can go into a section with a different drum (and bass) rhythm. This technique is helpful for either a whole section or for maybe a few bars in a section and analyse your favorite songs to see how they do it and how they smoothly transition back to the main rhythm. With this technique you'll want to make sure you don't overdo it with a bazillion different rhythms as the song will feel incoherent and unjammable.

Another effective method is to cut out the drum (kick) and bass at all and just have a section with mainly mid and high-end energy. This is very often done to for a sec completely drop energy and to cut some slack for listeners. Or for sad sections or for build up sections or for a few bars in a certain section. Again, look how your favorite artists do it. This one you also don't want to overdo because too much of this and the track will lose too much energy (especially if done too close to eachother).

Lastly, the bass line intself can also be really busy. It can be like a dorning bassline in the chorus which thus has a lot of energy so you want to make sure that at some point you get less droney (if the bass is rather loud) because otherwise it will fatigure the ears of the listeners).

### Common way to supersaw
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=4693.0
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=811.0
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=4925.0

Supersaws often sound big and huge. However, the secret to the hugeness is actually in the bass layer and more specifically, the sub layer of the bass. It's the sub that gives that wide stack the foundation of being huge. Add to that a fatty top bass layer/top bass with charachter and that's a huge sounding harmony. Usually, you'll want to keep your supersaws clean, as in, not too distorted as they are there to make it wide and fill spectrum (but since it's a chord they mud up quickly). Then, the bass, which is one note can be made fat since it's a low frequency and because it's one note (so no mud or clashing whilst still filling) it's going to make the layer on top sound huge even if that supersaw layer on itself does not sound huge.

For the rest, common cuts are a slope around 100-200 Hz and then some OTT/Multiband. Also, supersaws tend to be harsh in the highs. Often it gets rolled off a bit there but if you then lack highs then a layer of white noise gets added. Due to the nature (being even over the spectrum) of white noise it sounds less harsh than the highs generated by the saw stack and it can also be layered in at a quieter volume.

### Common chord voicings and EQ tip for harsh sounds ( heavily distorted guitars, supersaws)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IqmqJrx1tTQ

First of all, getting the tone of your distorted guitars and/or saw waves right is the first step to get them sound right. However, typically (heavily) distorted guitars and/or (super)saws tend to have a lot of very high (and very low) frequency content making them harsh and almost painful sounding whilst also muddying up the mix. A common EQ technique (see Fox Stevenson livestream and above video and other statements), regardless of other mix and sound dependant EQ decisions, is to simply cut out the sound around the 20-30Hz frequency range and then also at the top of the 15-20k (?) (see video) frequency range. This will cut both the mud and the harshness ugly sounding noise out. This a nice EQ to just have somewhere at the start and it will set up your sound greatly for EQs and compressors after and it will sit better in the mix. Of course, if for your mix even more low-end needs to be cut for example, or some areas need to be notched, or boosted slightly than in later EQs you can do that of course.

Also, note that these harsh sounds are different than white noise that is also often used in the background of EDM productions to fill up the mix (or often super saws in the noise section of serum). Kind of weird why we add white noise when we wanted to cut out the harsh frequencies right? Well, white noise does not sound harsh because there is a lot of frequency content all over the place so ones the highs starting sounding loud and harsh the lows and mids probably also do. With saw waves it's just that the fundamental and its upper frequencies (harmonics) and their loudness are kind of wack which is why e.g. a saw can sound harsh on just a normal sound level. Therefore, white noise can be put in the background as a fill, and additionally, the loudness of it can be lower too because there is no tone in it that needs to cut through (unlike with the saw), it's just noise to fill in the mix so also in that way the upper frequencies will be damped simply by being put more in the background.

Also, if the sound is heavily distorted, due to intermodulation you'll want to keep only to octaves and fifths of the fundamental if your stacking notes. In the case of supersaws, it's simply harmonic content (if they are not distorted at all) which is super rich so stacking them also creates mud if it's close so in that case, in the LOWER stacks you'll want to keep to octaves and fifths and then at the top add extensions. If stuff still sounds too muddy try leaving out some fifths and/or octaves in the upper regions (or fifths in the lower region even) to clean up the chord a bit but keep the extension flavor.

Lastly, In FL Studio in EQ2 you'll find some presets for those type of cuts and they can be adjusted upon taste or sound or mix.

### Solid bass through sub seperation
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=d01f32eCtOc&t=319s

(Perhaps this needs its own article, or needs to be placed elsewhere). 

Bass is the foundation of a track. More specfically, the sub frequencies are what give the track energy and foundation. You want your sub, being your kick and bass mostly, as clear as possible. What this means is that you don't want processing on those instruments that will alter or weaken the waveform in the sub range (or at least you don't want processing on the sub frequencies of the sound). You'll also want this to be mono as stereo again makes it seem less focused and more airy/phasey.  

The problem with all that is that adding stereo, chorus, weird eq/compressor automations (see dubstep), stuff that messes with the fundamental/sub frequencies, are all very common ways to make your bass more interesting and T H I C C. But your sub will be weakened and less focused because of it.

The most common solution to this is to seperate your bass in a sub and a top layer. The top bass gets all the fx and interesting stuff, the sub bass doesn't and thus remains fully stable (and mono). 

Now, your two bass layers will still clash in the sub area as the top bass still has a (weakened) fundamental in the same spot as the sub. So you EQ out the fundamental from the top bass so that your sub essentially now acts as the fundamental of your bass. Note that you'll need to play around a bit with EQ to find a position that EQs out most of the fundamental from the top bass.

Secondly, if you have a moving bass line that goes up and down the scale a lot, chances are that your sub bass might come in range of where you rolled of the high pass EQ on your top bass. A solution is to move up the EQ to filter more sub out from the top bass but sometimes that will make the top bass lack low-end as too much gets rolled off now. Another solution is to roll of the sub bass at the point where the roll off of the top bass happens so that the sub bass, when it gets in the top bass range gets rolled off and the now the top bass is mostly in effect. Of course, then you hear mostly a slightly unstable fundamental but in most songs these notes only get hit a few times and not on the important beats or parts. Of course, play a bit with the high pass of the top bass EQ and the low pass of the sub EQ to see where the sweet spot is.

Thirdly, often the basses will sound too much as two basses instead as one cohesive bass because the sub is just a single frequency and does not have harmonics to connect with/transition in the top bass. It's the same as when a synth plays a melody line together with the main synth but a few octaves up, it does not sound as one thick sound playing a melody anymore but two sounds playing the melody. If the octaves in between would also been played, probably it would sound more like one cohesive sound as you have waveforms connecting and overlapping eachother. In the higher ups this is sometimes a choice but in bass you'll usually want it to sound like a single bass. Same as with the melody, you'll want connective tissue (frequency content), i.e. you want some extra harmonics that can bridge the gap between the very clean sub and griitty bass. To do this, you have a few options, either you can use a low-passed saw wave with a relatively but not too steep slope cut off around where the top bass begins. Or, you could saturate/distort the sub bass to give it more harmonics (making it more "sawwy") and apply the same EQ as with the saw wave. Also, note that sometimes you don't need to apply a low-pass down low as maybe nicely sculpted highs of the sub bass play well with the highs of the top bass since it becomes muddy way slower up there anyway so it's not a big deal (perhaps giving a cut in the 100-300Hz range to not stack up there then, especially for the previous paragraph issue). Also note that the top bass is also often layered with multiple top basses for more fatness and/or more interesting sound.

Lastly, realize that low-end is more than just doing this, but this will help. To make low-end sit nice and sound clean especially with kick and clean and give headroom you need good sidechaining too. Also, you don't always have to necessarily seperate your sub. E.g. if your bass is a relative simple saw wave or real bass sampler with no fx (especially no stereo-ish, eq-moving, phasey, chorusy fx), it might not be needed (though in case of a unfiltered high harmonic harsh sound like a saw you'd need to sculpt and eq the high-end to better hear the low-end and thus hear it as bass). Same with samplers, you might not need seperation on the bass (or certainly not for your demo). Often though,  you'll want to create interesting bass patches which need stereo, chorus, delay, verb, flanger, etc. to sound interesting and that's where seperation comes handy.

### Make FL templates 
For basic stuff like sends and sidechain to make workflow better. Try to have tried and tested sounds for genres that you make, especially the main elements such as the chord synths, bass (layers), kick, snare, etc. For example, Moe shop has a signature piano preset + processing preset for his hard hitting funk style songs. Synthion has a bass and main, stereo and octave layer chord saws that fit well with that bass too and probably has a kick and snare too that work well with it. Saiph has a certain kick and snare he uses for his hard-hitting DnB that he knows work. This massively improves workflow since you are confident that these work together so endless sound selection and mixing aren't a thing and you already got the main sounds of your song. You'll only need to minimally process to fit within your current song too and it also becomes a bit of your signature sound. Now, in the beginning it will take a while before you find or make sounds that sound good together but once you do put them in a favorites or genre folder so for later songs you can start with it and slowy and surely you build u your library for good sounds per genre (also researching and being aware what kind of sounds/presets are common in your genre helps finding out what will sound good).

## The further back/unimportant a sound the sloppier it can be
If you have a piano that's playing in the background of the chorus, you don't need to sound design it or add velocity changes, etc. as much as you would with a piano ballad where the piano is the only (or very upfront) instrument. In the latter you need the velocity, fx, sound design all right since it's (one of) the most important instruments in the mix, in the former case it's barely audible or only meant as support or padding. That doesn't mean it can be awful but it can be a bit sloppier. Another example would be a ad that you compress the shit out of to give it more presence in mix. The compression makes it sound a bit bad/distorted but since it's so far back it is barely audible and adds more presence to the pad.

## Being good at music production is about knowing what your song needs and recognize potential
Being able to know what your song needs (better sound design, better leads, layers, need more fx for more alive, need more humanization, better composition, different instruments/patches, better processing, certain effects etc.) is what makes a good producer. It's not always clear what the production needs, sometimes it needs multiple things to sound it as you want.

It's something you get a feel for over time. For example, when your song doesn't sound good you know whether it is because it needs layering on the lead, the chords, it needs a pad etc. or you simply need to make it sound more alive (see "song writing" for tips). Again, it's never really clear and sometimes it's also about just trying to see what works and what you like. Sometimes you have to try and see if a layer works, sometimes you have to try and see if a transition arp makes the song enough alive (or needs even more, or doesn't work at all), sometimes you have to try and see if adding a pad makes the song more full, add a hat pattern to see if it makes the mix enough bright (due to not enough high-end), etc...

Another thing is knowing potential. In the beginning you'll mainly be working with samples and presets that probably aren't hundred percent processed the way you want but you know it's got potential. Or you design a chord patch which doesn't sound particularly good but you know it will sound good when you apply processing to it.

## Context of mix
bad solo but good mix like distortion, never judge whether a sound sounds good solo, always judge it in context of mix, played with the other instruments

## Common Lead/Bass/Chords layering
(Note that these don't always need to be happening for all. It can be for all, none, a few, depending on your sound, mix and post processing) (Also maybe link to Synthion konpeito livestream?) (Also what about common reverbs and delays? Like same as for common vocal verbs and delays? Look up!)

Generally you want either your chords to be wide or your lead to be wide because else they'll be in eachothers way but you want them in for information and support. Usually that's why you'll make your chords wide and your lead mono. You could make your lead stereo but you'll notice how that gets lost in translation a bit and it's very unstable and not in your face at all. You want to have that contrast of a wide chords and then (pretty) mono lead. Now, of course you'll want to beef up lead usually with a (or more) stereo layers (additionally to an octave layer) to still give it some slight spread. But then keep the mono layer and add another layer with a few voices and not too wide and make it a bit quieter. Makes your lead a bit wider without giving up the mono/stereo contrast. Very common is to have a mono, focused lead and then a less focused wider supersaw as layer (less focused cuz more stereo and maybe less bright?). With bass same thing, keep your bass in mono but you can have top bass or a layer be more stereo for some wideness. Also, this is in general, in your case you might have chords mono and lead stereo (like maybe a piano chord rhythm section where you might have a floaty flute on top where you want the chords to be in your face and the lead just a bit floaty, experiment!), or bass stereo and whatever mono. Also, if you want your chords to be more noticed you can still give them a mono layer too but just try to not make it clash with lead (through composition) or through mid/side or whatever (Konpeit - Synthion livestream beginning he talks about his supersaws + bass layer).

### Better composition
Try to first design chord progressions in a saw patch (or a sine patch). It is a nice neutral which you can start off with. If it sounds good in there, then try translating this over to your actual sound you want. That might require some tweaking, mixing, and maybe even some slight re-composition (since it might be muddy in the other patch) but it's a good start.

### Funky tricks
Some nice, funky tricks: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XxSHnRRjxo4. Notice the param EQ 2 but also the in and outro, not only with filter but also with automated reverb to make stuff seem far and come closer (in intro) or go further (in outro). 

## Advice
## Installing everything on your D: drive
You want your OS drive to be incredibly light-weight. Any data, like music project files, notepads, samples etc. should be on D: drive. Only programs are okay on C: drive since these are easy to reinstall and will work again as long as you point them to your D: drive things. Maybe pirated things go on D: Drive too since we'll need to torrent them and perhaps reinstall the whole thing again (?).

## Back up torrent files
Torrent files are light weight and if we do lose a certain thing it can be easily redownloaded from that torrent.

## It's the details that count
Usually, it's the details that count. That is, in mixing, all these little changes you make might not (always) be really hearable but the sum of all these changes will result in a great mix. Same with a sound. A lot of sounds are boring but with some minute changes (can be big if necessary) like some delay, reverb, maybe a flanger some interesting ADSR enveloppe + automation you can make a sound really come alive vs. just being stale. Same with a song, you can have an epic 8-bars, BUT it might sound repetitive if all you do is loop through it, no, you need to add some background details here and there, have some minute changes in chords/melody/velocity/whatever. All these changes are small and a lot of it is details, but again, these are so so crucial to have a song that is boring vs. a song that is alive. Currenlty I have this problem with my songs, I have decent loops but they are boring since the sounds I use don't develop, aren't interesting enough and I don't have enough detail (like some changes, like chords play then some melody with diff synth, or some background noice). These details in a song are so crucial because if you master that you can literally make a two-chord song of 3 minutes interesting enough and non-repetitve enough for the listener to keep listening. It's all about increasing listenability and be able to reach 3 minutes or more in an interesting and unboring way. Or like layers too, have interesting layers that complement eachother AND/OR also create a unique sound, have layers come in and come out, again, for variety, etc.
https://www.reddit.com/r/edmproduction/comments/bvs8hm/whats_the_most_obscureadvanced_thing_you_know/epsg0ky?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x

## If forgetting to record...
You can always get whatever you played on your MIDI keyboard if you go 
