# Sound design (and recipes)
This article is for specific sound recipes, like a "DnB snare" or an 'EDM riser". It's not meant for generic stuff and it's also just suggestions to throw into there.

## Hard-hitting DnB snare
TODO: Research more

You'll usually want to find a snare that has a lot of white noise as a body/tail and possible some reverb (?) on it as well so it really cuts through the mix.

For layering you'll want to look into layering a regular snare with some more high-end but not super subby claps, possibly some stadium claps and also possibly some snare that is more white nois-y. You'll of course want to eq them out as you won't need the fundamentals of all, just the timbre or transients that they bring. Again, you'll also want at least one of the layers to be good in transient.

Also, your other stuff, especially your bass you might want to sidechain to this snare too as it will take up a lot of frequency space once it hits so you'll want to make stuff when this one impacts.

## Generic EDM riser
You'll have to decide whether to use a more tonal or a white noise riser/downlifter. Often both get used and layered together. You'll also need to decide if you let it pump with the music or just as is right now.

### Common way to supersaw
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=4693.0
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=811.0
https://theproducersforum.com/index.php?topic=4925.0

Supersaws often sound big and huge. However, the secret to the hugeness is actually in the bass layer and more specifically, the sub layer of the bass. It's the sub that gives that wide stack the foundation of being huge. Add to that a fatty top bass layer/top bass with charachter and that's a huge sounding harmony. Usually, you'll want to keep your supersaws clean, as in, not too distorted as they are there to make it wide and fill spectrum (but since it's a chord they mud up quickly). Then, the bass, which is one note can be made fat since it's a low frequency and because it's one note (so no mud or clashing whilst still filling) it's going to make the layer on top sound huge even if that supersaw layer on itself does not sound huge.

For the rest, common cuts are a slope around 100-200 Hz and then some OTT/Multiband. Also, supersaws tend to be harsh in the highs. Often it gets rolled off a bit there but if you then lack highs then a layer of white noise gets added. Due to the nature (being even over the spectrum) of white noise it sounds less harsh than the highs generated by the saw stack and it can also be layered in at a quieter volume.
