[Home](../index.md)

# Compression, Limiting & Clipping
## Table of contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
1. [What is a compressor](#what-is-a-compressor)
2. [Why reduce dynamic range](#why-reduce-dynamic-range)
3. [What is a limiter](#what-is-a-limiter)
4. [What is a clipper](#what-is-a-clipper)
5. [Compressor vs. limiter vs. clipper](#compressor-vs-limiter-vs-clipper)
6. [Dangers of using a compressor](#dangers-of-using-a-compressor)
7. [Compression vs. volume automation](#compression-vs-volume-automation)
8. [Compressor settings](#compressor-settings)
9. [Transparant compression](#transparant-compression)
10. [Compression techniques](#compression-techniques)
11. [Tips](#tips)

## Introduction
//

## What is a compressor
A compressor is a device that **reduces the dynamic range of a signal**. Say we have a certain sound sample. Accross its duration, the sample fluctuates between 2db and 20db loudness, an 18db dynamic range. To reduce this, we can put the signal through a compressor. Through the compressor settings we can tell it to turn down the signal whenever it goes above a certain threshold in loudness. For example, anytime it goes above 18db, we might want to turn the signal down in volume so that the overall signal is less fluctuating in dynamic range.

## Why reduce dynamic range
It's to even out a sample in loudness a bit more. It will be hard for a vocal performer to sing all the lines at the same loudness due to human imperfection. Perhaps the performer was too into it or was a bit closer to the microphone at some points. We could technically automate the volume at those loud points but usually those are many (it could be a word, or even just a part of a word or a letter) curves we'd need to add and it would be tedious to add and maintain all these points. Also, in live performance, we cannot predict when then signer will be louder or quieter so a compressor becomes vital for keeping loudness in check.

Either way, to keep going with the vocal sample example, the evening out gives us the benefit that we now have an easier time setting the volume balance of the vocal. Before, some words were maybe too quieter or inaudible but turning up the vocal in volume would make the rest too loud. With the compressor you can make those loud parts quieter and more equal to the quiet part(s). This way we can now turn the vocal up without the other parts sounding too loud. A result is a clearer vocal accross the board.

Other reasons are for fattening a sample. For example, playing a piano or bass note always has a certain decay, it's not endless. By putting a compressor on instruments like that, the decay will essentially be slower, making the instruments be present for longer in the mix. This is also used with more short and transient samples. For example, a kick may have a great transient but it's body (giving it that low-end energy) isn't up to par. You can compress the kick (the transient in this case) so that the body and the transient are closer together in volume. You can then turn the kick up. The result is a fatter kick (as in, the body has become louder and thus plays a bigger part in the mix).

If we have to put compression in more technical terms. Basically, a compressor raises the RMS of a signal by reducing the peaks first and then bringing up the gain of the full signal to those previous peaks.

## What is a limiter
A limiter is the same as a compressor except that its ratio (see later) is infinite. What this means is that your loudness threshold (see later) becomes your ceiling. Rather than attenuating a signal above that threshold according to a certain ratio (i.e. with a compressor, the attenuated signal doesn't have to be reduced below the threshold necessarily), the signal will now be attenuated to always get reduced until it's below the ceiling. The signal in essence gets fully slammed down to where you set the ceiling. 

A limiter is helpful in for example mastering where you want to greatly thighten up the dynamic range of the whole song in order to increase its fatness and also be able to make it louder. With the ceiling you also make sure and prevent that there are any signals that will go above that ceiling and thus you can be rest assured that your listener's ears won't be blown off.

That said, a limiter is unhelpful in being transparent as you often don't want to just slam down all peaks, no matter how high or low, below a threshold which quickly can lead to distortion but also sucking the whole live out of the sound (though for heavy dnb and dub and what not sounds this + mb compression, see later, is what gets used a lot, see OTT) (Also lookup more compressor vs. limiter usage).

## What is a clipper
A clipper is the same as a limiter but in reality it really means distortion. What a clipper does is also have a ceiling but rather than attenuate a signal, it quite literally chops its peaks of, "squarifying" the signal (= distortion). Of course, this adds (depending on settings) a lot of extra audible harmonic content (because of the chopping of are extra tones vs. smooth curve see Fourier transform article). Because of this reason, a clipper is hardly used to reduce dynamic range in a signal rather it's more used as an fx (such as distorted guitars) but you have to be careful with notes and harmonies (see "Distortion").

*Intermezzo: Clipping comes from the analog days where, if you'd run your signal too hot, the device couldn't handle the input and would start chopping off peaks at the point where it couldn't handle the signal. This clipping was often damaging for the equipment, luckily in digital we don't have to worry about that. That said, clipping still occurs if digitally (see next Intermezzo) your signal is running too hot (which you can't hear) and you then hear it through speakeers which converted that signal, but since it's too hot, the signal will clip. This is what you often hear when mics are too loud or sounds in general like [here] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kU4gIJgmbfk) and [here] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SUDl2lohcv4).*

*Intermezzo: Small note about digital clipping. In the digital world, stuff can't clip (it can but the range is ridiculous thanks to the floating point stuff used, see image line text in sources). Therefore, INSERT tracks will never clip even if louder than 0db. Of course, if that signal does not get gain reduction at any point afterwards and straight up gets send to the master, than the audio will clip since the master is connected to a speaker and through the digital to analog conversion, (see my "audio recording" article) it will clip the audio. In other words, in the digital world, you only really have to worry about whether your MASTER is going into orange (which is close to clipping) or red (which IS clipping and thus distortion and very bad).*

A useful thing about clipping to reduce dynamic range, though, is soft clipping. You see, normal clipping (distortion) is hard clipping and special clipping (saturation) is soft clipping and kind of works differently. Instead of saying "fuck your peaks", it says "fuck your peaks...gently". It still chops off peaks but it kind of does smoothen it a little bit out making the distortion of the wave less harsh and noticeable. This can be quite effective on a master bus because now it will gently distort the highest peaks in your song, which squarify the peaks instead of attenuating it as a limiter would do. A result is that instead of literally chopping of the transient with the limiter, you have reduced the dynamic range by replacing a part of the transients with distortion which sounds like a transient (see intermezzo).

*Intermezzo: It is known that short unprocessed transients in sound kind of sound the same as there distorted counterpart. This is because distortion adds harmonic content (so high-end too which is a big part of a transient) but the sound (or peak) itself is so short we can't really "hear" the distortion.*

In short, a (soft) clipper can be reduced on the highest peaks on your master chain to attenuate the highest transients and replacing them with distortion. Again, you can''t really push it since the distortion will soon be audible especially if it starts clipping more than just transients. However, the peaks thats you CAN inaudibly distorts is essentially a gain in dynamic range whislt still "keeping" your transients (maybe like 0.5-1db). And after that, now you can slam your brickwall limiter on which now has to work less and also can't chop the transients of as much since parts of those are replaced with distortion anyway. Similarly, a soft clipper (or saturator? same thing?) can also be used on individual transient heavy elements (or sounds with high transient peaks, percussion drum buss, plucks) for the same purpose. Again, you can't slam the limiter fully down as it will either distort too much or be too noticeable but for those sounds where transients are important (or integral), this can be a useful technique to try and shave off a 1 or so db without having to compress and or limit. So you'd use this before your peak reduction compressor usually so you have to reduce less peaks (?).

## Compressor vs. limiter vs. clipper
Both a compressor and a limiter are similar to eachother. First of all, in there attempt to reduce the dynamic range, they try to retain the original waveform shape as much as possible. That is, it has sort of a look-ahead functionality so that it will actually try to keep the original waveform at the point it should be attenuated but just at a less loud volume/less big amplitude (Of course, at some point even the limiters and compressors can't do but distort the signal in order to carry out the compression). A compressor has a ratio you can set and the threshold is sort of a guideline. With a limiter, the ratio is basically infinite and the threshold is a ceiling making for much thighter and strict compression. A clipper, as said, is distortion. It technically reduces dynamic range by running a signal too hot, completely chopping off the peaks. It has no look-ahead whatshowever so the chopped off peaks are the final result.

So a compressor and limiter have some overlapping usages. The usage of a clipper vs. those is basically if you want/need to retain the transients. As said, a compressor and limiter will attenuate the signal to be quieter so the transients will be made quieter. With clipping, the transients will be chopped off but as said, the distortion sounds as transient so it seems like the transient is preserved. A clipper does sound like distortion very quickly. Therefore, a clipper on a sound is usually used to chop off the loudest peaks but still preserving the transients. If clipping too hard, or the sound is too sustain-y, you'll distort. Oppositely, with limiting (and compresion), if you limit too hard, your sound will be void of any transient as anything in your sound is same volume (you may still have some transients, as a short burst of high frequency content also makes part of the transient, but it will be too much reduced).

## Dangers of using a compressor
Before we dive into how a compressor works I'd want to note that compression itself is a tradeoff. You're always trading of the raw audio quality for e.g. lessened peaks or for the sake of loudness and fatness. In a mix the latter attributes are more desirable but if you'd hear the sound on itself, it does not sound as good as it once did (though it sounds loud). So yeah, it really is finiding that sweet spot where it sounds as fat as you want in your mix (or other things) and where the quality is not lessened too much. 

If you're a bit experienced you'll hear this lack in quality also in a lot of masters vs. unmastered mixes. The mastered mix sounds very loud, louder than the unmastered mix. However, if you'd compare both at a reasonably loud level you'll notice that there are some slight distortions/clipping artifacts going on or that a lot of stuff is being really fat and not really as punchy and pure as in the mix. You'll also often hear that in sample packs where you might hear the audio quality is not decent on a certain sample, it's probably because it's already been compressed to hell which brings out artifacts and stuff. Though, this is not necessarily (though it can be) a porblem as in a mix context, and especially a loud master context, the rest will be brickwalled. So use these samples with caution and if you know they will sound good in the master, else look for some less compressed higher quality stuff.

## Compression vs. volume automation
So you could argue that if you want a signal to be quieter at certain parts in your mix, you could just automate the volume. That's a viable question and in fact, if all you need is to simply have a vocal be less loud in a verse than it is in the chorus, you can do it this way.

However, with compression, we're usually not talking about those kinds of volume fluctuations. We're talking about volume fluctuations that happen in a short, very short and extremely short (1ms) timeframe. For example, take a look at any (uncompressed) vocal sample and just look at all the little peaks at different volume levels here and there. If we were to want to try to make those even in loudness across a whole mix we'd need tens, or maybe hundreds of tailored volume ducking automation levels...just for that single vocal sample already. And while that gives us the most freedom to set it exactly as we want, it's also extremely tedious, time consuming, error-prone and most likely not needed.

A compressor, on the other hand, will automatically detect when a part of the signal is too loud and turn that down automatically. It can do that down to .01ms accuracy even.

## Compressor settings
- https://musicianonamission.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/CompressionCheatSheet.pdf

Explain the buttons and stuff gain release attack threshold knee ratio. Attack is not when it kicks in, it's just the time it takes for compressor to reach full potential so with an attack of 10ms, it will already compress before, just only at 10ms it will compress at the settings you told it too.

### Attack
Controls at what speed a signal compresses downwards. You'll usually want this one fast if not instant because you want to catch all the loudness from the get go. Though, one of the reasons to not have super fast attack is when the transients are important and need to be kept (though there are additional/other and better methods to keep those).

In terms of attack (knee?) it will also depend. Attack is straight forward, you'll usually want a fast attack (instant to 10ms???) because when your compressing you don't want to miss out on the sudden transients and peaks, the things you want to compress in the first place usually. That said though, you sometimes want to preserve transients and peaks so that's where you put your attack slower so it reaches full potential only later instead of instantely. Usually you dont want to put your attack slower than necessary but also not faster to avoid cutting transients. Of course, the slower the attack, the more transparant the compression.

### Release
Controls at what speed a signal goes back to normal. You'd want to keep this as slow as possible since a weird signal paired with a fast release and attack might give some weird fast up and down curves (due to rapid volume fluctuations. Though, for instruments that rely on transients you'd still not want the release not too slow to have the signal (almost) back to normal for the next note for the note to have full impact. Too slow release (with a fast attack) might also cause an audible pumping effect if the compression is hard enough (and if instrument strucks chords/notes fast after eachother, then it ducks fast, comes back up slow but in a very rapid manner causing audible pump).

In terms of release, it's more a debate. A long release is the most transparant but what happens is that, if you set your attack slower too, it will again not fully let out the beginnng transients since the release is still recovering. So while it gives a really steady sound, it does suck all dynamics out of it and life basically. A fast release, however, is very noticeable and can cause a pumping effect due to the signal going from compressed to suddenly not compressed (which might be a sudden volume change) to compressed again which happens often since a sample, like a snare, has lots of little dynamic changes which then get accented by the short release. Of course a long attack will make it so that the release does not have too much to release too, but a slow attack will, again, not compress too much. So, as a general guideline, for example, in case of a snare or kick or anything transient heavy, you'll usually want your release slower than whenever the next time it hits since you want the full transient of it (and let the peaks be handle by a different compressor see later in techniques) but you also don't want it too fast to avoid too unnatural dynamic changes and pumping effects. So yeah, depending on the sample, sound, loop, etc. you have to hear what setting.

### Threshold
Controls the loudness threshold when the compressor needs to act. It interacts with the ratio a lot. For example a low ratio and high threshold could almost have the same effect as a high ratio high threshold setting. However, rule of thumb with the threshold is that you usually set it high when you mainly want to catch peaks (tame transients). You set it low(er) if you also want to catch the body of the sound (making stuff fatter). You then simply after having decided and set that adjust the ratio to how much it should compress.

### Ratio
Controls how much the signal above the threshold needs to be compressed.

### Todo
- Knee?
- Sustain?

## Transparant compression
I'll share some techniques in a moment but if you're using compressors to actually compress stuff you'll usually want to make your compressed signal [as "transparant" as possible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transparency_(data_compression)#:~:text=In%20data%20compression%20and%20psychoacoustics,has%20no%20perceptible%20compression%20artifacts.)

In other words, you want your compressed signal to sound like it's not even being compressed at all since then that means your sound is still sounding as it should. Of course you still do want to achieve your compressor goals so a balance needs to be struck between the too.

Generally speaking, setting a slow attack and release will be the most transparant. In fact, set the slowest attack and release and no matter the ratio or threshold, your signal will barely get compressed and even if it gets compressed, there will never be big fluctuations in your sound due to the slow release. Add in a very low ratio, in fact the lowest 1:1 and you have the most transparant compression: no compression at all.


## Compression techniques
(Note: this section needs to be added to/changed until I learn more about compression)

There are tons of ways of using a compressor, whether that is how you set its settings or how you use/chain it in your fx chain, but here I will try to cover the most basic and common use cases for compressors.

### 1. Taming peaks
The most common and basic use of a compressor is to simply tame loudness peaks. The reason we often want to tame peaks is because, in the case of for example a vocal, we want it to be on a normal volume level. However, due to the loud peaks this is really hard to accomplish because on a normal level these would blow your ears out. If you'd then try to turn down the volume of the vocals we won't have our ears blown off in certain parts but we will now not hear the vocal that was okay in volume at first loud enough. The solution is to tame the peaks which allows us to stay at the same volume, but since the peaks are reduced, we will never get our ears blown off.

The settings for this compression is usually very gentle. You'll want to make sure to only catch the real too loud peaks and leave the rest of the signal alone as to keep the sound as natural as possible. In other words, set your threshold to the higher side of things. Also, since peaks are often in transients and short, we want our compressor to catch all of it so we'll want a fast attack too.

As I've just said, since this compression is really gentle and only used to catch peaks, it's extremely versatile since the gentleness of the compression will never make your sound suddenly sound unnatural, weak, overcompressed, etc. This is why you could basically throw it on anything, whether that is one-shots, loops, vocals, guitar, piano, busses, etc. Everything can use some peak compression, even the tiniest almost unaudible bit. For real though, you can often look at the waveform (or render MIDI) out to see if it really is necessary to tame some peaks here and there.

To tame peaks you have two options: a low threshold low ratio setup or a high threshold high ratio setup. The first one will compress more parts of the signal but it will do it gently and transparant (coupled with a slower release time too). This one is great if you have some peaks that aren't too out of line with the rest and due to its gentleness it is quite transparent. So go for this first if you can. Sometimes, however, it happens that your peaks are "so loud" that you'd need to set your threshold so low to be able to preserve the low ratio that will keep your compression transparant whilst also taming the peaks enough. In that case though you might be introducing compression artifacts and your compression might actually sound more unnatural due to these artifacts (quiet sound being audible and stuff) so it kind of doesn't only compress to tame peaks but also to change the sound. In that case it's often easier to set a more drastic compressor with a high ratio but with a high threshold so that it only catches the peaks BUT does immediately chop them off good enough and leaves the rest of the signal unaffected. This is very handy for those "very" loud peaks that would have required too much fidelling. Of course, it's more drastic and less transparant so you'll might have to play a bit with the threshold and the ratio, but it's more effective at taming peaks. So yeah, high threshold and ratio is more effective at taming peaks, however, low threshold and low ratio is more transparant and can be enough to tame peaks. So it depends (?): 
https://ask.audio/articles/how-to-tame-difficult-vocal-recordings
https://www.gearslutz.com/board/newbie-audio-engineering-production-question-zone/1096224-ratio-vs-threshold-compression.html (see one of the first comments that reiterates what I have said)

### 2. Bringing out body/sustain/fatness
Ok. This one is also very common but you need to be careful with it. Basically, this type of compression is used to give more "umpf" to a sound. It differs from the previous compression technique by actually noticeably, not-so-gently, compressing the signal. Again, nothing extreme, but enough to actually bring the dynamics closer, that is bring the transients closer to the body of the sound.

For example, with a kick sample, you can use this type of compression if you want more body in your kick. That is, the transients is now quieter while the body of the kick is at the same loudness, result is that if you now turn up the volume again to at what it was peaking previously, you'll hear the same loudness but with the same body since now the quiet part of the kick is actually too. Same technique can be applied to bass, or piano where you'll usually want to add a bit of this to make the sustain notes ring a bit longer which adds more stability and overall fatness to the sound. With snares, just like the kick, it's to bring the body more out again.

Settings for this are a little less straight forward. Usually you'll want a fast attack to be able to squash all/most of the signal so everything gets reduced in dynamics. The threshold and ratio also depends on how much squashing you want to do and how drastic you want it to sound. Usually the threshold is lower and the ratio is higher than with peak taming.

Also, while this one is fairly safe to use on one-shots or a sample with only one instruments, it's a bit harder to get the results what you want on loops with multiple elements, busses, etc. This is because there are all different elements at play and you'll probably not want the same compressor settings for these elements. Add to that that your compressor settings will definitely be audible and you can end up with something that sounds unnatural, overcompressed or bad. This is not always the case and it depends also on how drastic your compression is, but yeah, this technique is way easier to do on one-shots and single instruments since you can tailor your compression to that one single thing.

A last thing also. Often, this technique will also reduce/squash the transients. To preserve that, you can make your attack a bit slower so the transients still come through whilst the rest gets nicely compressed. And bonus tip, since this might mean that now your transients are too loud since they are not compressed, you can add a peak tamer compressor (commonly done) before this compressor to tame the peaks. This way you get the nice "umpf" without losing transients AND your transient peaks will also never be too loud since they've been shaved off slightly already preemptively.

### 3. Parallel compression
So then there is parallel compression (a.k.a. rear-end or new york compression). This one is also used to give more "umpf" to the sound but usually used more on (drum) busses (even the master) and loops and stuff since it kind of remedies the problem we had with the previous example where compressor settings might not be ideal for multiple elements. With this compression technique we can give "umpf" while preserving the natural sound and dynamics of our sound regardless of whether it is a one-shot, a loop or a buss.

What we're gonna do with PC is basically compress our signal very extremely so that ALL dynamics are crushed. What this gives, is depending on the settings, a really aggresive and possible even distorted forward sound with absolutely no dynamics at all. Now, of course, if we leave that compressor at 100% wet our sound will sound like shit but basically, again depending on the settings we mix in basically only 10-30-40% of the wet of the compressor with our dry uncompressed signal. As a result, what we get is the extreme energy, stability and fatness that our overcompressed signal gives mixed in with the totally preserved dynamics which we have not compressed at all of course. So if the sounds sounds too aggressive and unnatural, simply turn down the wet until it gives "umpf" yet sounds natural. And as you can see, no more messing with ideal compressor settings, you just set all to very aggressive (depending on what you want) and then simply mix in to taste.

Again, since we do preserve the natural dynamics, there might be some peaks here and there so yet again we often first do a gentle peak tamer compression to only then feed it to our parallel compressor to give it the energy it deserves.

As I said, this one is often used on (drum) busses or loops since it remedies the compressor setting issue we had to bring energy to stuff but also because the elements together also make it so that our compressed signal contains a lot of energy. With signal instruments, or a one-shot there is only so much PC and overcompression of that one thing can bring out (?). That said though, you can definitely use it on piano and bass too since these are also very dynamic instruments by nature (especially slapp bass) so this could add some extra life to those things too. Same goes for one-shot drums. But yeah, usually if your just after some extra body on a one-shot or more sustain on a single instrument, then you can be fine with previous compression technique I'd suppose.

### 4. OTT compression
OTT compression (or the multi-band compression option in serum FX which isn't normal MB compression) is basically an extreme multi-band compressor in an upwards and downwards way. What this usually has as effect that since it compresses both downwards AND upwards, it basically brings all the low bits in volume and all the high bits in volume to a closer middle point resulting in no to very little dynamics. Parallel compression kind of does the same by dragging down the big volume points all the way down the low volume points so you can think of OTT as a parallel compressor basically (like, why not pull down fully with PC, why do we need the upwards compression too?). Also, OTT is multiband adding for extra customization of the bands. It's therefore kind of like a MB parallel compressor.

So because of the very little dynamic range, what usually happens to a sound is that the upper harmonics, which are usually quieter in volume become prominent because of the upwards compression and that the fundamental and the first few harmonics become less in volume because of the downward compression. So at 100% often it's actually very hard to really hear what your fundamental is as everything is so levelled out. Also, this is different from saturation since saturation also makes harmonics more prominent but it also adds extra harmonics (basically, saturation sets up a sound by adding the seeds, and then OTT brings it out, as you can't enhance what isn't there). Also, with saturation, you might need to (MB) compress after as maybe some harmonics are a bit too out of wack in terms of volume.

Either way, because of all this OTT basically makes a sound brighter and gives it more presence. This is handy for mixing reasons but also for brightness reasons which has been a trend for modern genres and makes our mixes more open sounding. Therefore, pair it with some subtle (or not so subtle) saturation (saturation first) and you can make any sound stand out with this technique. Usually you don't want your OTT to be 100% though, more like > 50% or > 30% depending on the situation.

Lastly, because it's MB you can also tweak the compressor settings a bit. For example, you may not really want to have the lows be as crushed as they are so you give them a higher threshold or perhaps you want your highs (for some reason) to come out even more. Or perhaps you want the upwards and/or downwards compression to be more or less. Often though, the reason we use OTT is because of the crushing so often the default settings are left as is and it's only the mix knob that is used really.

In short, OTT is the PC of EDM. Use it on anything you want to stand out and in general just want to brighten up and give some presence. Use it subtely on your master even if you need some extra brightness.

### 5. Bus compression
It's not really a technique but mostly it means you'll compress on the master, or you'll compress on instruments routed to a same track such as your drum kit. This one is used mainly on drum busses or on layers of synths and bass in EDM. This one is used to save CPU sometimes. That is, if there are certain compression settings that can work for your whole bussed sound, no point in applying individually. However, this is most commonly used for "glue compression" (using a glue compressor). The reason it glues things together is again because we're going to reduce the dynamic range a bit, tame some peaks and so in general make the loudness of all sounds more uniform and equal. Again, you'll usually want to use really gentle settings (maybe even the glue compressor plugin, what does it do?) to not introduce artifacts due to your attack and release settings. But yeah mainly just glueing your sounds more nicely packaged together so they sound more coherent, coming from one singular source (cuz having some hats be like louder than snares or whatever may make it not sound as though it's coming from the same drum which is not what you desire).

### 6. Serial compression. 
We already touched upon it, it's basiclaly putting compressors in series to do things rather than letting one do all the work. Very common used in the scenario of taming peaks and then adding umpf but can also be used in other cases. Basically, it's best practice to always use compression settings as gentle as possible and give each compressor basically one job and let it do that job good. Same as with EQs.

### 7. Multiband compression
- https://www.waves.com/multiband-compression-beginners-guide

With MB compression you are able to target a or multiple BAND(s) of frequencies of a sound rather than all frequencies with regular compression. This can be handy for more surgical compression. A common scenario is for taming a lead, or a lead bus. Often, we want leads to sound bright so we don't want to cut too much highs (maybe a shelf or low pass at a very high Hz treshold but that's it). However, often in all this brightness the lead (or a lead layer) sounds too harsh in the 4-5k area (usually), especially if you have multiple lead layers (and these frequencies make our ear hurt) as there will be some hurtful resonances (as our ear is sensitive to those high Hz we can hear well and are more than just hiss as the really upper range). Our lead is fine for the rest but we just want to tame some resonant or loud frequencies in that area. We could of course notch out those Hz with narrow EQ cuts (though if the lead changes pitch often these cuts are kinda redundant) and/or we could use something like the soothe plugin and this will work fine but if it doesn't or if you need more (or you are too lazy to do surgical EQ) you can use MB compression specifically around that range. It will then compress all louder/resonant frequencies in that area whilst for the rest keeping our lead the same keeping those harsh and loud frequencies in check. Also, when our lead changes pitch it will keep compressing at all the new areas where build up is happening rather than with EQ cuts where its set to stone (dynamic EQ though? Is that soothe?).

So what is MB used for? Regular compression, OTT compression and dynamic EQ (though they both basically have the same purpose). Basically if static EQ ain't working for you, since maybe sometimes in the song the highs should be more or less pronounced than at the point you put your static EQ, it can be handy to have an MB that can manage the loudness of bands, in this case the highs, and more carefully attenuate the highs or attenuate the lows if necessary. This can help on the master to make your mix less muddy or too harsh (?) since if done correctly it will turn down lows and turn down highs when needed to. OTT compression, we touched on and regular compression is just if you would like to compress your signal but for some reason you'd want different settings for each frequency band. I see this a better fit already for loops and stuff because you can have at least already different settings for different frequencies.

Also, as this article: https://www.waves.com/multiband-compression-beginners-guide states you can of course use it on your master because it allows more control meaning you can compress some frequencies while leaving others alone which might improve a (bad) mix.

So yeah, anyway, these are just the most common cases. You have to watch some tutorials and livestreams to see how these cases get used but also more advanced cases (especially how EDM leads get compressed and when they get compressed). So again try stuff out, use references, try to match them using the technisues, watch livestream, etc. I've got a general idea, but need to know better still. And then also watch EQ tutorials about taking out resonants best practices etc.

## Tips
### Synths don't need compression
- https://musicianshq.com/do-synths-need-compression/#:~:text=Synths%20do%20not%20necessarily%20need,create%20a%20certain%20distinctive%20sound.

I'll admit this is slightly clickbait, however, when using compressors with synths, you really have to think differently about the purpose. That is, a voice recording will always have a bit too much dynamics here and there and an instrument recording may always have too little body and sustain. That's just how that instrument works. That's why use compressors to bring out the body and sustain more or to even out the dynamics a bit. With synths this is absolutely unnecesssary.

Think about it, take you default synth patch. It's an on or off patch. If we'd use a compressor on that, we'd do nothing since it's an off/on switch. Nowhere in the patch does the volume change and the volume doesn't decay either. It's completely useless. Now, of course, most patches will have ADSRs but again, if you think your patch has too little sustain, instead of using a compressor, you can simply change your synth settings. And on top of that, you can have a macro to change the sustain over the song if that's what you need. Like, we can program synths in the settings the way we want them to sound, so we don't need to correct at all for sound mistakes. 

On top of that, synths work with MIDI which have velocity controls so if stuff is too quiet or loud we can simply make some or all notes that are too loud or quiet louder or quieter. For example, a sub bass may go into the highs suddenly which may suddenly be a spike in loudness so you timply turn down the MIDI velocity. Now, again, if that is too much hassle for some reason AND the ADSR is good to you AND the ADSR cannot be automated, then yes you may look into corrective compression.

That doesn't mean a compressor isn't used in synths. For example a multiband compressor or an extreme multiband compressor like OTT we can use since it will compress a certain band while it leaves others alone. In this case there will be a difference because frequencies are being compressed differently. Often this is used to compress the highs a bit more to bring out the harmonics a bit louder and have that bite in it.

So in essence, a compressor *in the tradional sense* isn't used nearly as much as it is on recordings, (unprocessed samples), real-sample VSTs, but as a means of *effect* like transient processing or making it brighter (or sidechain compression) it has its uses on synths too of course.
