So here talk about timbering and layering and how layering creates interesting but also certain timbres good layers like search and explain typical layer examples here too and stuff like that and talk about sustain + pluck layeers and a few other layering techniques and stuff and why layering

### How to layer
https://youtu.be/wMVoEBBggwE?t=862

So, layering is usually done for two things:
- To add fatness
- To add stereo
- To make a cool timbre

Sometimes it's one of those purposes, sometimes both. Either way, layering is everywhere, even in Jazz. For example, when there are certain lines played you might sometimes hear perhaps the saxophone and piano playing the same thing (melody and or chords) at the same time. This is a timbre layer since the saxophone and the piano together make for a really nice and cool timbre together that brings some spice to some melody lines and changes things up. You can also add the saxophone one octave up though then, if it's loud, it sounds less like one timbre but still it sounds like a nice layer.

An example of a fatness layer would be in a supersaw stack where you'll layer different layers with different frequency filling content to make a fat sounding sound that fills a lot of the frequency spectrum. For example, you might have a patch that is really bright and sharp and then another patch that is there to fill up the body of the sound more. That said, there usually is always a dominating and louder layer in fatness layers and the other layers are support layers.

Lastly, there are also layers to add stereo. For example, you might want to have your lead in mono but you also don't really want it to be entirely in the middle so you mix it in with a bit of a similar layer that is quite stereo and so you can make your main layer be a bit more stereo if you so desire.

#### A few notes with layering

In case of supersaws and any spectrum fill chord stacks, if you layer for fatness, it's because that is the focal point of the drop, like in future bass. A good strategy is to layer is to have different filling roles. Like some fill a bit the low-end more and others are filling the high-end more but you'll pretty much have always a single layer as the dominating layer and the other layers quieter to not clash too much and have ugly build up. No need to harsh eq either but maybe a little bit here and there to make them sit better. But yeah, usually with supersaws it's like a harsh high-end moving focused supersaw layer with a lower normallish supersaw supporting layer.

In case of the cool timbre it's often doen for like in bass or leads if you layer multiple sounds you might get a cool bass timbre and which might be fat too. In jazz there might be a cool timbre if you layer a saxophone and a piano on the melody line. Si it's not always about fatness sometimes it's about just (briefly) having a cool timbre. Also, it's common to layer some slight white noise with either leads or a supersaw depending on how big you want it and whether there is not enough in the high-end but you usually want it subtle. Other example is layering snares, get some claps with your snares or some funky sounding claps and you got a cool timbre. It also adds to the high-end (so it could be either or both functional and timbre serving) so it fills it up nicely and adds some verb with a big clap for filling up space. Last example is where you layer some pluck with a sustain, the pluck/transient to cut through and make the notes audible and the sustain for some sustain on those notes for some body (but less loud usually).

With layering, especially for creating cool timbre or cool instruments playing together, make sure that your sounds are a different timbre so they will have different harmonic content (so they won't stack too much creating mud) and or are in a different octave range, in this case you can get away maybe even with the same timbre as the range is distinct enough (especially the more octaves you go up). And again, you'll probably want to turn down in volume one layer as not both can have same space, might need a bit of eq too, however, if the octave layering is there and different timbre, you might get away with having them both reasonably loud. For the fatness you want different layers too but mainly in terms of frequency content (so an octave layer and a stereo layer) so that the timbre is still a bit similar but still not clashing. But again, analyze your favorite songs and checkout how they do layering.

Lastly, the reason we layer for fatness and why we can't do it in a single patch is because first of all, it's sometimes hard to get all the sound we want from a singly synth patch, it's too much tweaking. And for example, if we like our dominating synth patch we don't want to screw it up, we want to add to it with other synth patches so we can delete those if those were bad but sitll keep our main patch. It's like why you woulduse multiple eqs or compressors in serial, they each are dedicated to a single function and whilst sometimes you can technically do all your stuff in a single patch or eq or compressor setting, it's usually way easier to take smaller steps with multiple things in serial of layer and if you fuck up one you still have the good settings on the rest.

## Add decay on everything
You want to add a decay to your patches, especially the louder ones (often like the melody and or the chords and or the top bass). The reason is that first of all an infinite sustain sounds very unrealistic but second of all is since these sounds already play louder than rest and if they are sustained infinitely that will be an immense amount of sound and there won't be room for a lot of other stuff and listeners will be fatigued quickly too. And on top of that, it adds an extra interest when the note you're holding decays and then comes back in full force when played (or chords or whatever), like right when you're about to lose attention. This is similar with how liberate you can be with transients and percussions to fill a mix (like they are just short snappy sounds) but how careful you have to with sustain and try to make these not too loud in the mix either and or a bit on the side or try your composition to be different (again maybe the sustain needs to be on the forefront like future bass or whatever so it depends) so you have quiet sustain but some stabby sustain. Also, the decay does not need to be super quick or immediate but it's mainly for when the notes are hold longer and how long the decay is depends on your mix and stuff.

Also, for bass, especially sub bass, and maybe pads and other sounds, decay is not necessary probably since a sub is not really audible and distubring for sound and you actually need it for stability. Same with pads, they are usually quieter so it's ok for them to not have a decay (or a slow one). Again, top bass probably you do want some decay for the long notes but again this all depends but it's a good tip because often not having decays and or using too many loud sustain sounds is what crowds a mix really fast.


### Like
why are string usually played (a bit) higher than piano in the spectrum what makes their relation in timbre like that? Like pianos usually warmth but less bright and strings nice and bright or?
