[Home](../index.md)

# Compression, Limiting & Clipping
## Table of contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
1. [What is a compressor](#what-is-a-compressor)
2. [Why reduce dynamic range](#why-reduce-dynamic-range)
3. [What is a limiter](#what-is-a-limiter)
4. [What is a clipper](#what-is-a-clipper)
5. [Compressor vs. limiter vs. clipper](#compressor-vs-limiter-vs-clipper)
6. [Dangers of using a compressor](#dangers-of-using-a-compressor)
7. [Compression vs. volume automation](#compression-vs-volume-automation)
8. [Compressor settings](#compressor-settings)
9. [Transparant compression](#transparant-compression)
10. [Compression techniques](#compression-techniques)
11. [Tips](#tips)

## Introduction
// todo: Like the other articles, have a more practical oriented compressor article as well where I don't need to explain stuff anymore but do give general guidelines as to what to do (like the -6db 4:1 ratio trick).

## Resources
- https://www.image-line.com/fl-studio-learning/fl-studio-online-manual/html/plugins/Fruity%20Limiter.htm
- Image-Line FL Studio compression: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gJUmUd4FfeM

## What is a compressor
A compressor is a device that **reduces the dynamic range of a signal**. Say we have a certain sound sample. Accross its duration, the sample fluctuates between 2db and 20db loudness, an 18db dynamic range. To reduce this, we can put the signal through a compressor. Through the compressor settings we can tell it to turn down the signal whenever it goes above a certain threshold in loudness. For example, anytime it goes above 18db, we might want to turn the signal down in volume so that the overall signal is less fluctuating in dynamic range.

## Why reduce dynamic range
A first main reason is to even out a sample in loudness a bit more. It will be hard for a vocal performer to sing all the lines at the same loudness due to human imperfection. Perhaps the performer was too into it or was a bit closer to the microphone at some points. We could technically automate the volume at those loud points but usually those are many (it could be a word, or even just a part of a word or a letter) curves we'd need to add and it would be tedious to add and maintain all these points. Also, in live performance, we cannot predict when then signer will be louder or quieter so a compressor becomes vital for keeping loudness in check.

Either way, to keep going with the vocal sample example, the evening out gives us the benefit that we now have an easier time setting the volume balance of the vocal. Before, some words were maybe too quieter or inaudible but turning up the vocal in volume would make the rest too loud. With the compressor you can make those loud parts quieter and more equal to the quiet part(s). This way we can now turn the vocal up without the other parts sounding too loud. A result is a clearer vocal accross the board.

Another reason is loudness. As the FL Studio manual states, the attack/transient (first 10ms) is not what makes the perception of loudness, rather it has many other important roles (timbre, crisp, clarity, punch...) but loudness is not one of them. The sustain IS what makes loudness and that the sustain is what we can raise with compression. For example, playing a piano or bass note always has a certain decay, it's not endless sustained sound at the same volume. We can put a compressor on that and basically compress the louder transient part making the overall sound quieter but bringing the transient and body closer together. And then, when you turn up your gain to match the peak you had before compressing, you end up with a sound that is now louder since the sustain/body is now raised. Same with kick, if a kick is not loud/fat enough you can compress it to raise the body (which can still be short if it's a short kick, just anything after 10ms is body already) and thus make the kick fatter sounding.

Note that in the loudness case, compression is always a trade-off between dynamics and between loudness. Overcompressing a kick and there will be no punch, no clarity and no whatshowever. In those cases, especially for transient sounds, often times distortion is favored which has the ability to replace transients (since distortion on short sounds sound like added transient) while reducing dynamic range and thus making the sound fatter. But again, don't go overboard with the fatness as if you go too fat for certain things it may just overpower the whole mix.

## What is a limiter
A limiter is the same as a compressor except that its ratio (see later) is infinite. What this means is that your loudness threshold (see later) becomes your ceiling. Rather than attenuating a signal above that threshold according to a certain ratio (i.e. with a compressor, the attenuated signal doesn't have to be reduced below the threshold necessarily), the signal will now be attenuated to always get reduced until it's below the ceiling. The signal in essence gets fully slammed down to where you set the ceiling. 

A limiter is helpful in for example mastering where you want to greatly thighten up the dynamic range of the whole song in order to increase its fatness and also be able to make it louder. With the ceiling you also make sure and prevent that there are any signals that will go above that ceiling and thus you can be rest assured that your listener's ears won't be blown off.

That said, a limiter is unhelpful in being transparent as you often don't want to just slam down all peaks, no matter how high or low, below a threshold which quickly can lead to distortion but also sucking the whole live out of the sound (though for heavy dnb and dub and what not sounds this + mb compression, see later, is what gets used a lot, see OTT) (Also lookup more compressor vs. limiter usage).

## What is a clipper
A clipper is the same as a limiter but in reality it really means distortion. What a clipper does is also have a ceiling but rather than attenuate a signal, it quite literally chops its peaks of, "squarifying" the signal (= distortion). Of course, this adds (depending on settings) a lot of extra audible harmonic content (because of the chopping of are extra tones vs. smooth curve see Fourier transform article). Because of this reason, a clipper is hardly used to reduce dynamic range in a signal rather it's more used as an fx (such as distorted guitars) but you have to be careful with notes and harmonies (see "Distortion").

*Intermezzo: Clipping comes from the analog days where, if you'd run your signal too hot, the device couldn't handle the input and would start chopping off peaks at the point where it couldn't handle the signal. This clipping was often damaging for the equipment, luckily in digital we don't have to worry about that. That said, clipping still occurs if digitally (see next Intermezzo) your signal is running too hot (which you can't hear) and you then hear it through speakeers which converted that signal, but since it's too hot, the signal will clip. This is what you often hear when mics are too loud or sounds in general like [here] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kU4gIJgmbfk) and [here] (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SUDl2lohcv4).*

*Intermezzo: Small note about digital clipping. In the digital world, stuff can't clip (it can but the range is ridiculous thanks to the floating point stuff used, see image line text in sources). Therefore, INSERT tracks will never clip even if louder than 0db. Of course, if that signal does not get gain reduction at any point afterwards and straight up gets send to the master, than the audio will clip since the master is connected to a speaker and through the digital to analog conversion, (see my "audio recording" article) it will clip the audio. In other words, in the digital world, you only really have to worry about whether your MASTER is going into orange (which is close to clipping) or red (which IS clipping and thus distortion and very bad).*

A useful thing about clipping to reduce dynamic range, though, is soft clipping. You see, normal clipping (distortion) is hard clipping and special clipping (saturation) is soft clipping and kind of works differently. Instead of saying "fuck your peaks", it says "fuck your peaks...gently". It still chops off peaks but it kind of does smoothen it a little bit out making the distortion of the wave less harsh and noticeable. This can be quite effective on a master bus because now it will gently distort the highest peaks in your song, which squarify the peaks instead of attenuating it as a limiter would do. A result is that instead of literally chopping of the transient with the limiter, you have reduced the dynamic range by replacing a part of the transients with distortion which sounds like a transient (see intermezzo).

*Intermezzo: It is known that short unprocessed transients in sound kind of sound the same as there distorted counterpart. This is because distortion adds harmonic content (so high-end too which is a big part of a transient) but the sound (or peak) itself is so short we can't really "hear" the distortion.*

In short, a (soft) clipper can be reduced on the highest peaks on your master chain to attenuate the highest transients and replacing them with distortion. Again, you can''t really push it since the distortion will soon be audible especially if it starts clipping more than just transients. However, the peaks thats you CAN inaudibly distorts is essentially a gain in dynamic range whislt still "keeping" your transients (maybe like 0.5-1db). And after that, now you can slam your brickwall limiter on which now has to work less and also can't chop the transients of as much since parts of those are replaced with distortion anyway. Similarly, a soft clipper (or saturator? same thing?) can also be used on individual transient heavy elements (or sounds with high transient peaks, percussion drum buss, plucks) for the same purpose. Again, you can't slam the limiter fully down as it will either distort too much or be too noticeable but for those sounds where transients are important (or integral), this can be a useful technique to try and shave off a 1 or so db without having to compress and or limit. So you'd use this before your peak reduction compressor usually so you have to reduce less peaks (?).

## Compressor vs. limiter vs. clipper
Both a compressor and a limiter are similar to eachother. First of all it's important to understant that, in their attempt to reduce the dynamic range, they try to retain the original waveform shape as much as possible. That is, it has sort of a look-ahead functionality so that it will actually try to keep the original waveform at the point it should be attenuated but just at a less loud volume/less big amplitude (Of course, at some point even the limiters and compressors can't do but distort the signal in order to carry out the compression). A compressor has a ratio you can set and the threshold is sort of a guideline. With a limiter, the ratio is basically infinite and the threshold is a ceiling making for much thighter and strict compression. A clipper, as said, is distortion. It technically reduces dynamic range by running a signal too hot, completely chopping off the peaks. It has no look-ahead whatshowever so the chopped off peaks are the final result.

So a compressor and limiter have some overlapping usages. The usage of a clipper vs. those is basically if you want/need to retain the transients. As said, a compressor and limiter will attenuate the signal to be quieter so the transients will be made quieter. With clipping, the transients will be chopped off but as said, the distortion sounds as transient so it seems like the transient is preserved. A clipper does sound like distortion very quickly. Therefore, a clipper on a sound is usually used to chop off the loudest peaks but still preserving the transients. If clipping too hard, or the sound is too sustain-y, you'll distort. Oppositely, with limiting (and compresion), if you limit too hard, your sound will be void of any transient as anything in your sound is same volume (you may still have some transients, as a short burst of high frequency content also makes part of the transient, but it will be too much reduced).

## Dangers of using a compressor
Before we dive into how a compressor works I'd want to note that compression itself is a tradeoff. You're always trading of the raw audio quality for e.g. lessened peaks or for the sake of loudness and fatness. In a mix the latter attributes are more desirable but if you'd hear the sound on itself, it does not sound as good as it once did (though it sounds loud). So yeah, it really is finiding that sweet spot where it sounds as fat as you want in your mix (or other things) and where the quality is not lessened too much. 

If you're a bit experienced you'll hear this lack in quality also in a lot of masters vs. unmastered mixes. The mastered mix sounds very loud, louder than the unmastered mix. However, if you'd compare both at a reasonably loud level you'll notice that there are some slight distortions/clipping artifacts going on or that a lot of stuff is being really fat and not really as punchy and pure as in the mix. You'll also often hear that in sample packs where you might hear the audio quality is not decent on a certain sample, it's probably because it's already been compressed to hell which brings out artifacts and stuff. Though, this is not necessarily (though it can be) a porblem as in a mix context, and especially a loud master context, the rest will be brickwalled. So use these samples with caution and if you know they will sound good in the master, else look for some less compressed higher quality stuff.

## Importance of transparant compression
With compressing, especially regular compressing, the goal is to usually be as "transparant" as possible](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Transparency_(data_compression)#:~:text=In%20data%20compression%20and%20psychoacoustics,has%20no%20perceptible%20compression%20artifacts.)

In other words, you want your compressed signal to sound like it's not being compressed as much as you can since then that means your sound is still sounding as it should. Of course you still do want to achieve your compressor goals so a balance needs to be struck between the too.

Generally speaking, setting a slow attack and release will be the most transparant. In fact, set the slowest attack and release and no matter the ratio or threshold, your signal will barely get compressed and even if it gets compressed, there will never be big fluctuations in your sound due to the slow release. Add in a very low ratio, in fact the lowest 1:1 and you have the most transparant compression: no compression at all.

## Compression and synths
- https://musicianshq.com/do-synths-need-compression/#:~:text=Synths%20do%20not%20necessarily%20need,create%20a%20certain%20distinctive%20sound.

Synths have a bit of an odd relationship with compressors, or at least the regular kind of compressors and its purposes. More often than not, the purpose of compressing a synth singla is different from compressing an actual real instrument and/or audio recording. That is, a voice recording will always have a bit too much dynamics here and there and an instrument recording may always have too little body and sustain. That's just how that instrument works. That's why use compressors to bring out the body and sustain more or to even out the dynamics a bit. With synths this is absolutely unnecesssary.

Think about it, take you default synth patch. It's an on or off patch. If we'd use a compressor on that, we'd do nothing since it's an off/on switch. Nowhere in the patch does the volume change and the volume doesn't decay either. It's completely useless. Now, of course, most patches will have ADSRs but again, if you think your patch has too little sustain, instead of using a compressor, you can simply change your synth settings. And on top of that, you can have a macro to change the sustain over the song if that's what you need. Like, we can program synths in the settings the way we want them to sound, so we don't need to correct at all for sound mistakes. 

On top of that, synths work with MIDI which have velocity controls so if stuff is too quiet or loud we can simply make some or all notes that are too loud or quiet louder or quieter. For example, a sub bass may go into the highs suddenly which may suddenly be a spike in loudness so you timply turn down the MIDI velocity. Now, again, if that is too much hassle for some reason AND the ADSR is good to you AND the ADSR cannot be automated, then yes you may look into corrective compression.

That doesn't mean a compressor isn't used in synths. For example a multiband compressor or an extreme multiband compressor like OTT we can use since it will compress a certain band while it leaves others alone. In this case there will be a difference because frequencies are being compressed differently. Often this is used to compress the low-mids a bit more to bring out the harmonics in the highs and have that bite in it.

So in essence, a compressor *in the tradional sense* isn't used nearly as much as it is on recordings, (unprocessed samples), real-sample VSTs, but as a means of *effect* like transient processing or making it brighter (or sidechain compression) it has its uses on synths too of course.

## Compression vs. volume automation
So you could argue that if you want a signal to be quieter at certain parts in your mix, you could just automate the volume. That's a viable question and in fact, if all you need is to simply have a vocal be less loud in a verse than it is in the chorus, you can do it this way.

However, with compression, we're usually not talking about those kinds of volume fluctuations. We're talking about volume fluctuations that happen in a short, very short and extremely short (1ms) timeframe. For example, take a look at any (uncompressed) vocal sample and just look at all the little peaks at different volume levels here and there. If we were to want to try to make those even in loudness across a whole mix we'd need tens, or maybe hundreds of tailored volume ducking automation levels...just for that single vocal sample already. And while that gives us the most freedom to set it exactly as we want, it's also extremely tedious, time consuming, error-prone and most likely not needed.

A compressor, on the other hand, will automatically detect when a part of the signal is too loud and turn that down automatically. It can do that down to .01ms accuracy even.

## Compressor settings
- https://musicianonamission.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/CompressionCheatSheet.pdf

Explain the buttons and stuff gain release attack threshold knee ratio. Attack is not when it kicks in, it's just the time it takes for compressor to reach full potential so with an attack of 10ms, it will already compress before, just only at 10ms it will compress at the settings you told it too.

### Attack
- https://www.spektrummastering.com/audio-blog/how-the-attack-time-of-the-compressor-actually-work/

Determines how long it takes for a compressor to reach peak compression. For example, if you've set your compressor to compress the loudest peaks -5db and you've set the attack at 20ms, then it will take the compressor 20ms to reach -5db of compression. Hence, if the loudest peak is before 20ms, it won't be compressed by -5db but maybe only -1db or -4db depending on how close it is to the end of the attack time. Attack therefore **is not a switch** that turns on after x amount of time, it's a slope that reaches a peak. **A compressor always compresses.**

Attack not being a switch actually has an advantage. It means that when you're compressing transient peaks of a sound, you can still play with the attack and not worry that none of the transients will be compressed. The transients will always still be compressed. Of course, the longer your attack time, the less the transients will be reduced in volume so if you're reducing transient peaks in volume you don't want to go too long on it but too short is also not necessarily necessary as it may cut the transients off too much and quickly.

But why would you ever use a slow attack time? Well, a slow attack time is for when you're not doing transient processing. Of course, note that transients is only the first 10ms so anything beyond that would already be a medium to slow(er) attack time. For example, if the transients in the sound are fine but you want to get more body/sustain, you'll probably set a slower attack time and play with the release according to your needs. 

Additionally, a slow attack is also handy when you're doing compressors in series (which is handy because just like with EQ, it is hard and messy to do multiple jobs, like high-passing, resonance filtering, presence boosting all in a single plugin). You can first have one compressor that takes care of the transient peaks and then you can have one that can take care of bringing out the body/sustain in the sound. Now the latter you don't want and need to process the transients anymore so you can set a slower attack to not affect it and again play with the release as you so desire.

*Note: that you don't want to set your attack too slow because then your compressor may not compress at all. For example, with a piano sustain hit, if your attack is really slow, it will compress only a little bit but since the piano quites down in volume too, it will quickly dip under the threshold and thus the little compression it was already doing will evolve in no compression so it will look on the graph as nothing has been done. Instead, make the attack faster so that your compressor can kick in in soon enough, you don't need to worry about touching the transients as those are only the first 10ms. So a slow attack is anything more than 10ms (you may attact transients a little but if you play with it it won't be noticeable.*

### Release
Controls at what speed a signal goes back to normal. You'd want to keep this as slow as possible since a weird signal paired with a fast release and attack might give some weird fast up and down curves (due to rapid volume fluctuations). Though, for instruments that rely on transients you'd still not want the release not too slow to have the signal (almost) back to normal for the next note for the note to have full impact. Too slow release (with a fast attack) might also cause an audible pumping effect if the compression is hard enough (and if instrument strucks chords/notes fast after eachother, then it ducks fast, comes back up slow but in a very rapid manner causing audible pump).

*Intermezzo: With fast attack/slow release (in sustain-y sounds very common), you usually can turn up (it's the goal to turn up) the volume of the instrument after compressor since the fast attack turns it down and the slow release makes it stay down for longer and smoothens up the loudness curve/gain reduction ultimately resulting in a flat(tter) dynamic range line (because the loud parts get turned down a lot and the quiet parts come up and in sustain sounds the part dies out but a slow release will always reduce gain reduction so that it's like -2db on a 4db loudness and then -1db on a 3db a little further sustain so in the end the sound is a (much) flatter line because the way sound dies out and the release comes up fall together it makes it so that all sound gets appropriate reduction based on how loud they are and thus flatlining singals in very long release settings).*

In terms of release, it's more a debate. A long release is the most transparant but what happens is that, if you set your attack slower too, it will again not fully let out the beginnng transients since the release is still recovering. So while it gives a really steady sound, it does suck all dynamics out of it and life basically. A fast release, however, is very noticeable and can cause a pumping effect due to the signal going from compressed to suddenly not compressed (which might be a sudden volume change) to compressed again which happens often since a sample, like a snare, has lots of little dynamic changes which then get accented by the short release. Of course a long attack will make it so that the release does not have too much to release too, but a slow attack will, again, not compress too much. 

Anyway, as a general guidelines, you can use longer release for getting more sustain. Think about a piano and/or bass that just holds down a single note per bar. You'll want to bring out quite some sustain so there is sound the whole bar. But, if your piano was a fast stabby/transient-y one that could mean that some transients of that stab are not sounding as loud due to the gain reduction from the previous note still being active. On top of that, in this case you WANT stabby and not smoothy so slow release is a big no-no in the latter. For transient sounds, using a compressor is usually about taming the (bigger) peaks. You don't want to smoothen the performance/transients because in that case they aren't transients anymore which is the reason you put them in the song in the first place (let alone the issues mentioned from gain reduction still being active, especially in fast percussion where stuff would just flatline with slow release, no life and no transient). But yeah, usually you want fast attack and fast release and simply use it to cut highest of peaks. You may be able to put threshold a bit lower to tame more peaks and the distortion that gets introduced due to the settings may be beneficial to replacing some of the tamed transients (se other article). If you need both transient and sustain, perhaps in case of the stabby house piano, you can have a first compressor to tame the (highest) peaks and then, if not enough, a second where you play with leaving a slower attack to keep through the (remaining) transient and a slower release to add more body/sustain.

So yeah the release (and attack) also depends a bit on the role the instrument plays, whether it's a slow moving sustain role or a fast moving transiety role (or something in between).

### Threshold
Controls the loudness threshold when the compressor needs to act. It interacts with the ratio a lot. For example a low ratio and high threshold could almost have the same effect as a high ratio high threshold setting. However, rule of thumb with the threshold is that you usually set it high when you mainly want to catch peaks (tame transients). You set it low(er) if you also want to catch the body of the sound (making stuff fatter). You then simply after having decided and set that adjust the ratio to how much it should compress.

### Ratio
Controls how much the signal above the threshold needs to be compressed.

### Todo
- Knee?
- Sustain?

## Compression goals
There are probably three main goals in compression: taming, fatness and limiting. We'll discuss them here briefly.

### Taming peaks
The most common and basic use of a compressor is to simply tame loudness peaks. The reason we often want to tame peaks is because, in the case of for example a vocal, we want it to be on a normal volume level. However, due to the loud peaks this is really hard to accomplish because on a normal level these would blow your ears out. If you'd then try to turn down the volume of the vocals we won't have our ears blown off in certain parts but we will now not hear the vocal that was okay in volume at first loud enough. The solution is to tame the peaks which allows us to stay at the same volume, but since the peaks are reduced, we will never get our ears blown off.

The settings for this compression is usually very gentle. You'll want to make sure to only catch the real too loud peaks and leave the rest of the signal alone as to keep the sound as natural as possible. In other words, set your threshold to the higher side of things. Also, since peaks are often in transients and short, we want our compressor to catch all of it so we'll want a fast attack too.

As I've just said, since this compression is really gentle and only used to catch peaks, it's extremely versatile since the gentleness of the compression will never make your sound suddenly sound unnatural, weak, overcompressed, etc. This is why you could basically throw it on anything, whether that is one-shots, loops, vocals, guitar, piano, busses, etc. Everything can use some peak compression, even the tiniest almost unaudible bit. For real though, you can often look at the waveform (or render MIDI) out to see if it really is necessary to tame some peaks here and there.

To tame peaks you have two options: a low threshold low ratio setup or a high threshold high ratio setup. The first one will compress more parts of the signal but it will do it gently and transparant (coupled with a slower release time too). This one is great if you have some peaks that aren't too out of line with the rest and due to its gentleness it is quite transparent. So go for this first if you can. Sometimes, however, it happens that your peaks are "so loud" that you'd need to set your threshold so low to be able to preserve the low ratio that will keep your compression transparant whilst also taming the peaks enough. In that case though you might be introducing compression artifacts and your compression might actually sound more unnatural due to these artifacts (quiet sound being audible and stuff) so it kind of doesn't only compress to tame peaks but also to change the sound. In that case it's often easier to set a more drastic compressor with a high ratio but with a high threshold so that it only catches the peaks BUT does immediately chop them off good enough and leaves the rest of the signal unaffected. This is very handy for those "very" loud peaks that would have required too much fidelling. Of course, it's more drastic and less transparant so you'll might have to play a bit with the threshold and the ratio, but it's more effective at taming peaks. So yeah, high threshold and ratio is more effective at taming peaks, however, low threshold and low ratio is more transparant and can be enough to tame peaks. So it depends (?): 
https://ask.audio/articles/how-to-tame-difficult-vocal-recordings
https://www.gearslutz.com/board/newbie-audio-engineering-production-question-zone/1096224-ratio-vs-threshold-compression.html (see one of the first comments that reiterates what I have said)

### Bringing out body/sustain/fatness
Compression is also used to add fatness to a sound. This is where we have normal compression but usually also other compression techniques like parallel, OTT and MB compression (see all later) come in. If it's normal compression note that the fatness we're talking about is not in terms of harmonics (vertically) but horizontally where the body of the sound comes out more and longer making the sound more fat and sustained and present and consistent sounding. It's giving the "umpf" to a sound that people often refer to.

You may do some of this type of compression on a bass line where you simply want the sustains to be longer and the overall fatness (since even the short notes will have their bodies be more audible). You may do this on a drum bus where you use some MB compression on it to bring out some of the sparkle and highs.

Fact with this goals is that **there needs to be stuff there to be compressed or else it's a lost cause**. If you do MB compression to bring out the brightness you need to make sure there are actual upper harmonics in your sound in the first place. Compression doesn't add harmonics, it just makes them more audible. This is why we often distort, especially before MB compression since it adds harmonics and we can then decide what to do with these (bring out or supress). Same with a bass line. If you're bass just gets super quiet too fast you cannot really make it much fatter (at least if the goal is for the longer sustain kind of fatness) because the amount of compression you would need to do to bring the body out would be so much that all the rest would distort so you simply need a bass recording with more sustain on it.

### Consistency and limiting
Next up is that you also use compression to simply make stuff consistent. Especially in modern EDM type of music you want stuff to sound consistent, whether that is in the foreground and background. Consistent sounding stuff sounds clear because it's always the same clearness, there is never a bit muffled and then other times a bit too loud, not it's nice and consistent.

I lump in limiting with this because limiting is also helping in consistency by simply not having signals go above a ceiling (see brickwall limiter on a master channel). This way you can both make sure your signal will never be too loud but also it adds to the consistency by keeping everything super tight and in check.

## Advanced compression flavors
The following techniques aren't per se advanced and are in fact important no matter what style you're making. I'm simply using the word "advanced" because it's more than just the regular compression with a normal compressor stuff.

### Multiband compression
- https://www.waves.com/multiband-compression-beginners-guide
- https://www.edmprod.com/multiband-compression/
- https://www.reddit.com/r/edmproduction/comments/2chkif/multiband_compression_on_synths_why/

Multiband compression sounds very complex but it isn't. In fact, **it's basically an EQ**. To be more precise, it's an EQ that can only cut and not boost. To be even more precise, the amount that is cut is dynamically controlled by a compressor throughout the whole song.

To clarify, with EQ, you're turning down the volume in a certain range or band. With MB, you're also doing that BUT it's dynamic (and thus controlled). It doesn't always turn down the volume, only when the volume in the band you're "cutting" reaches a certain loudness threshold (which you can set in the MB compressor). This is an advantage over EQ because the sound may not always have many problematical harmonics in that range, yet with EQ you'd still turn it down nonetheless. With MB you can set a threshold for that "sometimes problematic" band and then the signal in that band will only be turned down when stuff is indeed to loud, not earlier not later. 

#### MB vs. regular compression
With normal compression, if a loud sub noise in the sound triggers the compressor it will just turn down the whole sound. Same with if a high-end transient triggers the compressor, then it will also turn down the whole sound without considering turning down a certain frequency band more or less. This is ok to tame peaks and to give a sound more sustain (by compressing transients). However, you cannot fatten up your sound in the brightening sense since the whole sound gets turned down no matter which frequency band triggers it. So you can only give more sustain (sure in the tail may be more high frequencies and those are then more audible but it's not direct brightness) but not brightness. MB is also more transparant since with normal compression you turn down the volume of all sound which may be easier to hear a pumping effect while with MB it only turns down the area where it is actually loud so there may be less pumping heard. And lastly, normal compression sidechain means the whole sound ducks for the kick. But again, may be very blatant pumping effect depending on how drastic the settings. However, you only want to SC the sub of the sound (assuming it's not for aesthetic reasons) as to not interfere with the sub of the kick so again, you can use MB SC for more transparancy and have the top-end not duck or duck less while the sub ducks.

#### MB usages
One of the reasons to use multiband compression is if there is a certain *frequency range/band* that is a bit out of control, instead of throwing an EQ on it (which is static), we can throw an MB on it and actually give it proper *reactional* gain reduction (thus dynamic) to those out of control harmonics as they are not always there or out of control. A good example may be to control lead vocals as they have some problem sibilance frequencies (since sibilances aren't in every spoken word) and MB can help control it when it's there while leaving the rest of the signal alone. It's very similar to a dynamic EQ in form and in purpose it's pretty much the same.

Another common way for MB is on synths. While, if you have a good ADSR curve, normal compression is rare on synths, multiband can actually prove to be (very) useful. This is because it allows you to shape the brightness of a sound. For example, a mid bass may be super loud in the upper lows (since it's fundamental is there) but not that loud in the mids and/or highs. Often we want to add some brightness to the sound and we can get that by turning down a bit of the (low-)mids in MB and then gain matching to input (Ozone can do that all build-in). And at the same time, in that same MB we can then also compress the high bands so that when stuff gets too wacky and out of control there (especially with crazy basses that may do crazy modulation in EDM) we can control it. In fact, we can control each band to be setup to make sure to not go out of control at any point. 

*Intermezzo: With static EQ you could do this by scooping the (low-)mids and/or shelf-boosting the highs. But then you may run the risk that maybe your sound will get too loud because maybe it moves up an octave in a section and now all loud fundamentals may be in that section that you EQ boosted so stuff will be way too loud there. Same with if you scoop the mids, you may have less stuff down there in some cases but you still have that (harsh) scoop and now maybe your sound maybe to thin for that section. And so, while this is certainly doable and gets done, you would need an MB (or at the very least a normal limiter) to at least control the frequencies you've boosted or cut after that EQing anyway.*

An example. In EDM, on e.g. a mid bass, we often MB compress to control the sound (like normal compressor) but to also shape the frequency balance curve a bit (often we may compress the mid-lows a bit more than the highs to flatten the curve and add some brightness to the sound which is what is desirably in a bright genre like EDM). This usually means settings where we're turning down the lower bands more than the higher ones (which a normal compressor can't do) and at the same time we adjust the volume dynamically (which an eq can't do) in those bands so frequencies can never get out of control no matter what but we also don't turn down frequency ranges when it's not necessary. Result is a controlled and less mid and more bright bass. Then we may add another MB with the task to specifically add more high-end (since EDM is a bright genre). Also, often distortion gets added before MB to add harmonics (and make existing harmonic content louder) and overal sound fatter and then with MB you can control it whilst also shaping the frequency balance curve (flattening/brightening). Again, you can then add some more distortion (like another type for some other harmonics too) and again control it with MB whilst shaping the frequency balance curve as you want.

In short, **MB is about frequency band shaping (i.e. adding brightness by turning down low-mids) and controlling those bands (so they can never be too loud even when doing whacky distortion and/or modulation shit before it).**

#### MB on master
This controlling and shaping of the frequency balance is also why we use it on the master. You can make your mix brighter or less bright but in a controlled way and on top of that you also do the normal compressor job. Also, as this article: https://www.waves.com/multiband-compression-beginners-guide states you can of course use it on your master because it allows more control meaning you can compress some frequencies while leaving others alone which might improve a (bad) mix.

#### Don't discard normal compression
A normal compressor isn't useless though. Especially with recorded stuff and analog stuff and all that you can use it. **Think of a compressor as a volume ride and then an MB as an EQ ride** and that should make your life easy to know what to use. A compressor is thus totally fine for keeping the dynamic range of, let's say a vocal performance (that simply needs to have a consistent volume) in check. An MB on the other hand can afterwards then keep the sibilance more in check since rather than cutting with EQ we dynamically only turn down the sibilance when the sibilance are actually spoken (like the esses). A normal EQ is fine for fattening up a sound's sustain and taming peaks. MB can additionally fatten in the brightening way whilst keeping stuff controlled. MB can even shape the balance of a sound. On master same thing, have a compressor for peaks, an MB for shaping and then a limiter to shortcut anything above a certain ceiling.

An EQ is also not useless, though. In fact we may often, after the MB simply boost the highs a bit with our EQ to give it our sound brightness like that but then we can of course control it afterwards with the MB compressor just in case there would ever be some high volume harmonics in that range. Also, hard MB compression with upwards compression like OTT can also bring out extra brightening stuff too what a normal EQ boost cannot do (like what and how and why?) so you can have your brightening EQ, maybe some distortion and then some controlling multiband (and/or maybe OTT for getting some extra grit out of it? Or what exactly?). Like an EQ also gets used when there are simply consistent brightnesses or darknesses or mudinesses in your sound. Like commonly a saw bass may simply have too much top-end to act as a bass in that song, then you simply take it out or lower it with EQ. In this case, we ain't talking sibilances at some points in the song that need to be controlled when we get there, here we're talking about main timbre characteristics that we want gone or highlighted (for timbre, mudiness or whatever sake).

To tame peaks it's fine  and to give some extra body and sustain is fine but then if you want to make it grittier and fatter you can afterwards add some MB to it.

Lastly, it can also be used on busses since a few layers coming together may suddenly cause certain harmonics and ranges to shoot up at certain times in the song so to glue everything more together and control everything just throw an MB on there as well. Again, use multiple MBs just for incremental change and different purposes (like controlling, brightening, flattening).

#### MB vs. EQ
- https://performodule.com/2019/05/24/when-to-use-a-dynamic-vs-a-static-eq/

The line between whether to use an EQ or an MB can sometimes be thin and sometimes either one is fine. **The main thing is that EQ will always notch out and/or boost stuff in the same way no matter how quiet or loud the volume going into the EQ is. It works on the frequency range, not on the frequecny range based on a volume threshold like MB does.**

So, on a master it becomes obvious that MB is superior. Because, for example, there might be parts where stuff is getting too bright (because certain bright instruments playing together in that part) but then other parts where stuff is more fine. In that case the static EQ would notch out the highs just fine for that one section, but it would be too much for a less bright section resulting in a dark timbre there. MB would let go in the latter section resulting in a more steady and still bright timbre there (unless the section is dark in which case there is not much MB can/should do to have steady brightness).

It's the same on busses, again, if you have melody layers stacked together you'll want to MB compress the bus because the way they interact may be hard to predict and some sections the interactions may be super bright (because of composition/automations) and other less bright. With MB you glue them so all frequencies are nicely controlled (so you make sure no peircing highs, rumbling lows but still there when needed). Never too bright, never too dark and the frequency balance is as we want it. The only reason you would correctively EQ is if stuff is unnecessary to be in the mix (so it just needs to be gone rather than "present but it depends on the situation") like usually that is high-passing at 75-300Hz or if the buss indeed needs to be less bright *overall*.

It' a similar story on individual instruments. 

Now for EQ. Let's say your supersaws need to have more air overall, you can just EQ boost them. In fact, usually in the lows and (very highs) you can boost and cut like this. However, in the territory where your fundamentals and first-order harmonics (which are usually very powerful and loud in nature) are you need to be careful because (drastically) boosting certain ranges and others not may have a lot of sound fluctuations. Where the (very) highs have harmonics that don't change much in loudness regardless of of how high or low the fundamental of the sound is, the fundamental and first-order harmonics of course do.

For example, often you might EQ boost in the 2k-5k range for presence of a vocal or piano. In this case it's rather low but still ok to not think about it too much because 2k (the lower bound!) is already equivalent to a C7(!) note which is a fundamental we might not reach often as well as not the first-order harmonics. So boosting here won't have big volume implications and fluctuations but it does give some clarity. The secret is also to not go overboard with it and also have a smooth bell-like curve rather than a small range (so it sounds more natural, less nasal). However, starting to boost and cut around 300-1kHz may be more problematic because fundamentals are there and thus a change in notes/chords may have a drastic impact of volume because some.all notes may one time fall in the EQ boost area and the other time not. Again, you can do it but especially here (and the lower you go) you'll want to be discrete in terms of DB reduction and also prefer a smooth bell or shelf.

MB may be better to control stuff like that since it looks at the loudness. If a lot of notes are together in the range it will turn it down more to not muddy stuff up and/or be too bright, if not a lot of notes it will let it loose so you never really can have volume fluctuations. Either way, whether you choose EQ to shape timbre or not, MB is always good to have after for control. And also, MB is just very handy in shaping bands and the overally frequency balance and bands of a sound (which is hard to do with EQ curves and bells) so while an EQ might be able to do the job, an MB can just be handier, easier and it also has control baked in too (like a 2-in-1). But again, don't overuse MB, just know when to use it over EQ.

Also, with saturation (and maybe EQ on top) before it all to change and shape timbre, stuff might be getting out of control as well so again it's good to have an MB after all that stuff. Like even in normal instruments it may be ok to control the first initial signal with compressors (or maybe a cutting EQ before so no unnecessary frequencies trigger it) and stuff but then if you like put it through all kinds of crap like saturators and stuff you'll need to MB there as well just for control or just having a ceiling just in case stuff is getting out of whack.

*Intermezzo: a classic example where EQ has no drawbacks so to speak is with a kick. If you EQ the individual kick, that EQ will always do the same thing because a kick (usually) doesn't change pitch, don't have chords with the kick, no volume no whatever. It's usually just a kick on the same frequency and that's it. So your static EQ moves will always do the same thing to the kick because your kick is static in the frequency spectrum too.*

A rule of thumb is that you use EQ (and distortion) to shape *overall timbre* and cut away unecessary shit. You use MB to control that (or just in general) overall timbre. But, MB can also serve as timbre shaping and may be more conventient (like it can brightening stuff while keeping stuff in control) and also more appropriate due to some pitffals with static EQ (see earlier). Either way, don't sweat too much about what to use (especially timbre control and shaping), just keep above stuff in mind and the more you do it the more you'll feel about which is appropriate

Of course, if for some reason none of these things give you enough satisfaction and control, there is always automation!

### OTT compression
OTT compression (or the multi-band compression option in serum FX which isn't normal MB compression) is basically an extreme multi-band compressor.  in an upwards and downwards way. What this usually has as effect is that since it compresses both downwards AND upwards, it basically brings all the low bits in volume and all the high bits in volume to a closer middle point resulting in no to very little dynamics.

*Intermezzo: Where I compared MB to an EQ that can only cut, OTT are two EQs, one that boosts and one that cuts. The boosting happens when stuff is too low, the cutting happens when stuff is too loud. This is also on a micro-scale so this is where OTT may get out extra artifacts and liveliness that regular multiband compression may not be able to get out. That said, some producers swear by regular MB, others swear (more) by OTT.*

So because of the very little dynamic range, what usually happens to a sound is that the upper harmonics, which are usually quieter in volume become prominent because of the upwards compression and that the fundamental and the first few harmonics become less in volume because of the downward compression. So at 100% often it's actually very hard to really hear what your fundamental is as everything is so levelled out. Also, this is different from saturation since saturation also makes harmonics more prominent but it also adds extra harmonics (basically, **saturation sets up a sound by adding the seeds, and then OTT brings it out. It wouldn't be as effective without saturation and extra harmonics as you can't enhance what isn't there**). Also, with saturation, you might need to (MB) compress anyway after as maybe some (higher) (ear-piercing) harmonics are a bit too out of wack in terms of volume so saturation + OTT is a good combo.

Either way, because of all this OTT basically makes a sound brighter and gives it more presence. This is handy for mixing reasons but also for brightness reasons which has been a trend for modern genres and makes our mixes more open sounding. Therefore, pair it with some subtle (or not so subtle) saturation (saturation first) and you can make any sound stand out (in a controlled way) with this technique. Usually you don't want your OTT to be 100% though, more like > 50% or > 30% depending on the situation.

*Intermezzo: OTT is very similar to parallel compression (kind of has the same use case) as parallel compressions is also an extreme form of compression (it drags down almost all the signal very low so there is also very little dynamic range between loudest and quietest parts). In PC, however, the signal doesn't get brought up, it's only down. with OTT it's both. On top of that, OTT also has by default some extreme settings for the ratio (and threshold) so pair that together with the upwards compression and even the littlest things in volume will be brought up a considerable amount which may be hard to replicate with normal PC. Also, normal PC is usually not multi-band and while it can be done on a multi-band compressor (in fact, in Ableton the stock MB compressor has an OTT setting), slapping on an OTT is simply way easier and faster to get the effect you want. So in short, especially in EDM, we usually rather slap on an OTT to get both that MB control (to tame bings, e.g. the highs) and that extreme PC compression (brightness) we're often looking for. Of course, just like PC, you usually don't want the mix level to 100%. Also, PC still has its uses, especially in more natural and less extreme cases (look up!).*

Lastly, because it's MB you can also tweak the compressor settings a bit. For example, you may not really want to have the lows be as crushed as they are so you give them a higher threshold or perhaps you want your highs (for some reason) to come out even more. Or perhaps you want the upwards and/or downwards compression to be more or less. Often though, the reason we use OTT is because of the crushing so often the default settings are left as is and it's only the mix knob that is used really.

In short, OTT is the PC of EDM. Use it on anything you want to stand out and in general just want to brighten up and give some presence. Use it subtely on your master even if you need some extra brightness.

### Parallel compression
So then there is parallel compression (a.k.a. rear-end or new york compression). Probably one of the least popular types, especially in EDM. Probably because this one is also used to give more "umpf" to the sound but usually used more on (drum) busses (even the master) and loops and stuff since it kind of remedies the problem we had with the previous example where compressor settings might not be ideal for multiple elements. With this compression technique we can give "umpf" while preserving the natural sound and dynamics of our sound regardless of whether it is a one-shot, a loop or a buss.

What we're gonna do with PC is basically compress our signal very extremely so that ALL dynamics are crushed. What this gives, is depending on the settings, a really aggresive and possible even distorted forward sound with absolutely no dynamics at all. Now, of course, if we leave that compressor at 100% wet our sound will sound like shit but basically, again depending on the settings we mix in basically only 10-30-40% of the wet of the compressor with our dry uncompressed signal. As a result, what we get is the extreme energy, stability and fatness that our overcompressed signal gives mixed in with the totally preserved dynamics which we have not compressed at all of course. So if the sounds sounds too aggressive and unnatural, simply turn down the wet until it gives "umpf" yet sounds natural. And as you can see, no more messing with ideal compressor settings, you just set all to very aggressive (depending on what you want) and then simply mix in to taste.

Again, since we do preserve the natural dynamics, there might be some peaks here and there so yet again we often first do a gentle peak tamer compression to only then feed it to our parallel compressor to give it the energy it deserves.

As I said, this one is often used on (drum) busses or loops since it remedies the compressor setting issue we had to bring energy to stuff but also because the elements together also make it so that our compressed signal contains a lot of energy. With signal instruments, or a one-shot there is only so much PC and overcompression of that one thing can bring out (?). That said though, you can definitely use it on piano and bass too since these are also very dynamic instruments by nature (especially slapp bass) so this could add some extra life to those things too. Same goes for one-shot drums. But yeah, usually if your just after some extra body on a one-shot or more sustain on a single instrument, then you can be fine with previous compression technique I'd suppose.

## Other compression techniques
### Bus compression
It's not really a technique but mostly it means you'll compress on the master, or you'll compress on instruments routed to a same track such as your drum kit. This one is used mainly on drum busses or on layers of synths and bass in EDM. This one is used to save CPU sometimes. That is, if there are certain compression settings that can work for your whole bussed sound, no point in applying individually. However, this is most commonly used for "glue compression" (using a glue compressor). The reason it glues things together is again because we're going to reduce the dynamic range a bit, tame some peaks and so in general make the loudness of all sounds more uniform and equal. Again, you'll usually want to use really gentle settings (maybe even the glue compressor plugin, what does it do?) to not introduce artifacts due to your attack and release settings. But yeah mainly just glueing your sounds more nicely packaged together so they sound more coherent, coming from one singular source (cuz having some hats be like louder than snares or whatever may make it not sound as though it's coming from the same drum which is not what you desire).

### Serial compression. 
We already touched upon it, it's basiclaly putting compressors in series to do things rather than letting one do all the work. Very common used in the scenario of taming peaks and then adding umpf but can also be used in other cases. Basically, it's best practice to always use compression settings as gentle as possible and give each compressor basically one job and let it do that job good. Same as with EQs.
