# Production tips and thoughts

## Introduction
This article is to store my more "random" production thoughts and tricks that tie into a lot of the things that I'm saying in other articles but just in a more specific and slightly tangeant way. Therefore, this article might be a bit all over the place but it's just for those random thoughts and addendums that I don't have room for in the more structured articles. Also, these topics usually are small enough they don't warrant their own article.

## Sidechain (top) drum loops
Often you may find yourself using a top loop that has still punchy stuff in it. It may even be kick and snare. You can high pass the punch out so you only get the hats but you'll still hear the click and some punch in the higher end anyway. Sidechain these drum loops (heavily) to your current kick and/or snare and they will sound as if there was never a kick and/or snare in the loop, certainly if you pair that with a high pass filter.

## Why you need to seperate your patches (lead, chords and bass)
You'll notice that producers will often start writing in a single patch, often a saw wave patch. However, you'll see that they often split up the top (or any accent note) and the bottom (or any fundament note) in respective lead and/or bass patches.

This is an effective strategy for various reasons. First of all, having a melody is just a common musical trope, however, try to write a melody in the same patch as you have written your chords in. The melody will not stand out (unless perhaps it's very much up there in frequencies, but that kind of sucks to have a melody there) at all and will bland in with the chords. On top of that, a melody often plays "funky" harmonies w.r.t to the underlying chords and often these intervals are close together as well making for a lot of harmonics on a rather close space making for either mud or just noise (More on this see [Practical tips for a cleaner and professional mix](#hi))

Especially in a saw wave patch, where harmonics are very rich, having your melody and your harmony and then even your bass in the same patch can become very muddy or harsh very quickly just based on all the harmonics beating against each other alone which doesn't sound good in a mix. On top of that, a melody you'd like to stand out and be (kind of) clear in your mix, but if the note is equally loud (since it's in the same patch) and equal timbre and equal EQ and equal everything and also probably quite close in frequency range, it really doesn't stand out at all.

Continuing with the saw patch, turning it up is also not an option because again, a chord stack usually has a certain denseness in harmonics going on that it will overpower and mud/harshen the mix while not making the lead note in the patch stand out particularly more. You could turn up the patch and simplify the harmony but then you lose the denseness and richness and interest of the chord stack which will make your mix boring and thin. On top of all that, having a chord stack loud in the mix in general, especially with a patch that is harmonically rich, is not advised as it will sound quite harsh and/or muddy.

All that said though, a loud chord patch, that is harmonically rich, does fill up the mix nicely (even though it sounds harsh and/or muddy). So how can we fill up the mix but still sound clear and on top of that solve all the other issues too?

Well, we can do this with a simple "trick" or trope: seperating chord and lead. The idea here again has to do with harmonics. A single note (in most synth patches or instruments) doesn't have a lot of (first-order) clashing harmonics because...it's a single note. The most audible and present harmonics consist of a lot of octaves and fifths (maybe thirds) so very consonant and in tune with the fundamental. And thus, compared to a chord stack, the harmonics are way less muddy and also way less harsh. 

What this allows us to do is to have our lead (usually) louder in the mix without sounding harsh. We can even have a pretty harmoncially rich lead like a saw wave quite loud in the mix and a single note would still sound rather clean. This is cool because our lead is/can be pretty rich in timbre (as again, the harmonics will kind of always be in tune) and also be loud in the mix. We can have layers of the lead as well and again they would also still sound pretty clean (of course, if needed, need to mix well and/or do octave as there will be some masking) as again, it's inherently the same harmonics that get more amplified (or added but just higher up in the frequency spectrum). In other words, this allows us a loud element that can be focused on, as in common in music, while still sounding clean.

Now, the problem with having only a lead in your mix and no chord stack is that it may sound a bit thin. Extra layers help of course, especially octave down and up layers and that might do the trick (see drops in bass music), fx such as reverb and widening too but in genres with less layered leads and stuff, the mix will sound a bit thin (unless you maybe got a shitton of percussion and/or kind of rich bass line or whatever). Add on top of that that you can't do cool counter rhythms or counter melodies too.

Now, adding another single note thing under it (occasionally) may help this but the bottom line is that for a lot of situations, stuff will sound a bit thin if it's only a (rich) lead, the bass and then some non-harmonics drums so there is not much harmonic denseness or interest from a timbre or music theory standpoint.

This is where chord stacks are really useful. Again, they are rich and mud/harsh up stuff way more quicker than a single note but they are rich and dense thanks to the extensions (again see [Practical tips for a cleaner and professional mix](#hi) how to properly make chord stacks to make them as clean as possible yet dense and interesting) and they fill up the mix.

*Intermezzo: In EDM music you'll often hear like chord stabs in drops rather than having chords together with melody. Again, this is usually in a way where they play a harmonically rich bass which fills up the spectrum (thanks to sub, mid and top layer), though it's not super dense and super harmonically interesting, and then they add stabs for that nice fully rich and more harmonically interesting relieve, and it's also not too far apart that they mix feels thin (also there are background sounds like pads and arps and drums playing too so never feels too thin, really).It depends a bit on genre how single note and chord stacks intertwine. Like, for example, I made a song and the chorus had a nice chord stack going with the harmony but then for the verse I went to no chord stack but a more rich bass which was less thick and harmonically uninteresting but still sounded full thanks to the louder bass that would've overpowered the chord stack in the chorus, and with the background stuff and sound fx.*

The way to use them is to make the "harmonically clean" the loud (depending on genre and/or mix doesn't have to be much louder than the chord stacks) and focal point and centered point in the mix. From a composition standpoint it also helps for the lead to be played around the higher notes and that the chords (or that the chords play when the lead isn't playing or they play higher notes only when lead isn't playing or only for a short duration of time as a stab) just to automatically stand out more (again due to how harmonics work). What you have then is nice clean focal point but you also have a nice support dense and rich supporting chord stack behind it. Together it nicely fills up the mix and since the lead is now loud and the chords less loud, the mix sounds clean but still full.

Now, note that it's not only about loudness seperation here. Making the chords less harsh and lead stand out is not at all only about balance and depending on the situation you may or may not have your chords louder and or not. Again, this is the advantage of having your lead and chords in seperate patches as you for example make your chords a bit more stereo and/or chorus-y/a bit more rolled off/ and all that stuff. Anything to make the chords be supportive yet enriching and the leads stand out more. Similarly you can now on the lead note also apply EQ, OTT and all that stuff to make it stand out more by itself. In this way you can even have two exact same sound waves but have the chord stack pacht sound supportive and the other one sound lead-y.

*Intermezzo: Also, it depends on timbre of patch as well. A harsh patch and/or transient patch is effective at stabs (supersaws) but not effective for sustain and/or needs to be treated if it wants to be sustain. More rounded patches together with the stabs may be better (and/or more verbs and pads and stuff). Again it depends on the genre ahd check reference tracks to see how they do it. Just be mindful of chord stacks and timbre basically and the pros and cons of harsh vs. dark timbres as well as chord vs. single note.*

Another reason for seperating is also stuff like IDM (see [Intermodulation](#hi)) as having your lead and chords (and bass) in the same patch might make stuff even more muddy if somewhere down the line some saturation, limiting, clipping (see master) is applied so stuff will become real muddy and maybe just fully bad sounding.

So yeah, seperation is very handy. To also elaborate briefly with the bass. It's the same thing for bass but rather than harshness it's about mudiness and controlling the low mids. Again, usually you might want to keep composition of your chord stack in the low-mids sparse and/or roll-off a bit in that area, again, as the article I've linked a bit back says, the intertwined harmonics can make stuff muddy there quickly. However, it does sound a bit too thin there maybe so we'd maybe want a sound there that is prominent but with a lot of harmonics that do work together. That's where the (mid) bass comes in. Again, a single tone instrument so a lot of harmonics working well and now you can turn that one up a bit in the mix for a more cleaner low-mid and have your chord stack be a bit more sparse and/or rolled off in that area. So your mix won't lose warmth but will still sound clear. You might need to roll of your bass a bit if the upper harmonics of interfere too much with the funky extensions in the upperharmonics in the high-end but definitely in the low-end and low-mids it should be clear now. And yeah again, you can fatten the bass on its own, turn up or down the volume. You have just so much control over cleanness and prominence of the low and low-mid area. Also, on a micro scale this is also why we even seperate sub bass and mid bass. Simply for the control (see [Sub seperation](#hi)).

There are other reasons to seperate patches. The obvious ones are different processing, control different more interesting timbres, different functions and all that stuff. Like for a kick, selecting a perfect transient and then adding a perfect body, all that kind of good stuff. Or stereo layers and all that stuff.

Lastly, also all this stuff will depend a bit on the timbres too. Again, if for some reason your chord stack is/needs to be harsh, then do your lead less harsh as it will be too much. Usually you'll have you'r lead a bit more harsh and then your chords a bit less harsh (but again, either by tucking away and/or rolling off, decreasing volume, all that stuff).
