# Sound basics
> See "Music history" for some concepts in here.

## Overtones, harmonics and timbre
- https://www.reddit.com/r/musictheory/comments/7zm1zr/a_few_questions_about_distortion_and_harmonics/dup8e7r?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web2x&context=3

Every instrument produces overtones but not every instrument produces harmonics (only). Overtones are basically ANY other tones other than the fundamental tone when you strike the note. These tones don't necessarily need to have a harmonic relation with the note struck. Harmonics are the same except they DO have a harmonic relationship with the note struck. The harmonics in this case, and thus the series to build instruments around, have been decided to be integer multiples of the fundamental because again in the early years they found when strucking a note on an instrument that producer harmonics in that way sounded nice. And yup, this series also happened to line up with the mathematical findings.

*Intermezzo: Harmonics are by definition tones that occur naturally from instrument sound vibration. Harmonics happen to (since we've chosen our 12 tones based on the harmonic series, thanks Pythagoras) line-up with our 12-tone system. Of course, in 12-tet not so much (see next intermezzo) for all harmonics, but they still more or less follow the 12-tet harmony system with a maximum deviancy of 49 cents. (which is not even half a semi-tone and occurs only starting from the 11th harmonic anyway). It might be a bit confusing that harmonics are also not really in tune with 12-tet but harmonics aren't random overtones, thare integer multiplies (and they follow 12-tet closley), overtones are just random upper tones that don't have any harmonic relationship with the fundamental or even 12-tet. Also the harmonics are because of that integere stuff like fifths, thirds, octaves compared to the root/fundamental tone and therefore sound "harmonic" with the fundamental tone and all sounds harmonic too even when striking a chord and even with different instruments and timbres because it's all harmonically related (because of the integer).*

Most instruments are build to produce overtones that are harmonic (e.g. making the strings a certain way so the sound vibrations only produce harmonics) because harmonics sound nicely together with the fundamental tone, i.e. lot of unrelated overtones would make that note sound bad and unharmonic. Again, due to how stuff works, harmonics in Hz happen in an integer multiplied way. So for the first harmonic you have your fundamental, times two (since times one would be the fundamental again) which is...the octave (as the octave is double in Hz always). Second harmonic will be the fundamental times three...which is the fifth but ringing one octave up. And this goes on and on and on eventually you'll get to thirds, fourths anf stuff too which we then can condense in a single octave to form our twelve-tone scale (Look at the wikipedia chart: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Harmonic_series_(music), it's indeed the first twelve different tones that we get by multiplying with an integer that we took for our twelve-tone scale).

*Intermezzo: In 12-TET, again look at the wiki page, the harmonics will not be equal to the 12-tet intervals because 12-tet is what we tempered and harmonics is what occurs naturally in nature. Luckily, as you can see on the chart, the first few harmonics (the most noticeable?) are not noticeable that they are different so they sound still good to us. Further harmonics are (sometimes) a bit more dissonant but up to that point usually it's not super strong anymore the content and also, since it's harmonics, and not the fundamental, it will also not be noticeable that it's not in tune as much and rather it adds to the charachter and timbre of the sound. As per reddit thread above, when playing distorted signals, of same sound, together (not even about IMD?), the 3rd interval doesn't work well as we have a fundamental with an amplified 5th harmonic (so very loud) clashing with the fundamental 3rd. The 14 cents in difference between the root's loud 5th harmonic (due to distortion), equal to a pure major third, and the fundamental 3rd will have noticeable beating and clashing. This is why you don't want too much too disorted sounds played loudly at the same time or chord form.*

A few notes. Harmonics are a big part of the timbre of an instrument. Some instruments have a strong third harmonic, others a strong fourth, maybe other don't have any strong harmonics or others have only strong harmonics etc. Also, in a lot of instruments the harmonics might be a bit more or less (not perfect) and at some point the harmonics might start to diverge so much that the harmonics from that point are not really harmonics anymore. In practically all cases though, those harmonics are not really audible anymore and vanish in the sea of good harmonics anyway. Additionally, some instruments don't produce harmonics. Stuff like a snare or a kick have waves travelling in such a weird way that there is very little harmonic content in there. And you can kind of hear that, especially in a snare, it more sounds like a bit of random noise than any real tone just because it has so much of these random overtones.

*Intermezzo: A piano and a guitar sound different because they have a different configuration in harmonics (like which harmonics they have and how strong on loudness these are). That's not all (like attack and instrument noise and how you attack it also helps) but it's a big thing. That's why if you run a piano (or practically any sound) through a guitar amp, it will mostly sound like a distorted guitar because the amp is what (mostly) creates the timbre and that kind of timbre we've associated with distorted guitars and metal and rock genres but it's just a flavor of distortion (and some other audio manipulation stuff) The only reason it then doesn't fully like a distorted guitar is (mostly) the ADSR of the instrument played. This is also why you can make a sine wave out of any instrument. Any instrument has a fundamental so simpl filter out all the stuff above that fundamental and boom you have your sine wave.*

If you also apply this knowledge briefly to synthesizer waves, you can see how useful the saw wave is. The saw wave basically has ALL harmonics and has them ALL very strongly making it a really rich waveform. This is really handy in subtractive synthesis (were you start with a certain wavefrom and cut harmonics) as it gives you a blank canvas in which direction you want to go with the sound. You could go as far as mimicking certain real instrument by making the harmonics of your saw the same in strength as on the real instrument. If you then mimick the ADSR a bit then you'll have a sound that sounds close to that instrument (in theory). So yeah, the saw gives you a lot of potential into crafting sounds that sound realistic or just as if they could be real instruments. Of course, that doesn't render other waves useless (see Synthesis article).

Lastly, the overtones/harmonics don't follow 12-TET obviously but again, the tones that these produce are less loud than the fundamental anyway and also they follow closely to what 12-TET is so it doesn't matter that much.

## Sines and fourier series
Talk about how any complex sound starts with a sine. You can construct any waveform with sines (why?). Fourier series, transforms, analysis (other terms?). Why important or what can we do with the idea?. Well you can add very specific harmonics, or for example you can do a very clean sub cuz no harmonics added but all harmonics are to be understood to be sine waves you know in a complex waves.
