# Troubleshoot
This article is there to host common problems one may have in mixes and what the culprits are. Not sure if a handy article or if all these fit somewhere else but I think it's ok for now.

## Chorus (or other section) sounds less powerful, even if it has more stuff
This is a common problem I have and a common reason may be that when you look in SPAN is that the section before the chorus may actually have more/louder low-mids, mid-mids (and even sub) then the chorus section. Add on top of that, that the extra brightness in a chorus will, on some speakers, make the chorus indeed already sound less bass-y, you will experience this trouble.

Therefore, you need to make the call to remove some of those 200-500 (or up to 1000Hz) with some EQ bell curves, passes or compression on the section before the chorus or if you simply need to EQ less (or add more mids) in the chorus. It may also be a combination of the two so don't blindly take all mids out in the verse to comply with the chorus

Another reason may also lay in the transitions and the sounds there. They may not have enough high-and or low-end and even mids so the the transitions may sound weak and make the two sections not gel. Or it may be that the transition fx is too loud or again has too much frequencies somewhere and you might end up with a weak chorus again. Again, you want to make sure everything is nicely balanced in terms of loudness and frequencies (of course transitions can get briefly loud, especialy when blending in with the next section).

## Mix sounds weak and empty, especially on speaker devices
A common mistake is to think that this is because that you don't have enough sub, low, low-mids and/or even high to very-high frequency ranges but usually this isn't the case (especially if levels in these ranges seem right).

This has a few common causes that you can check out. First of all, if it sounds like your (very) high-end is too loud, like the hats and stuff, even if your SPAN looks kind of good, you have to take a look at your mids, especially the mid-mids to high-mids. It may just be that these are not loud enough or not prominent enough and since on speakers sub and low-end doesn't really come through but high-end and very high-end does, your mix sounds super cymball-y/hat-y. If you have louder and/or more mids or whatever, as they are the brigde between low and high, on speakers your highs and very-highs will a bit more masked or less prominent thanks to the mids in there even if the highs and very-highs are on the same volume level.

To add to that, especially if it may sound good on shitty headphones, that you have too much instruments/harmonics in the low-mids to maximum mid-mids and too little harmonics/instruments in mid-mids to high-mids so on speakers yet again, since the instruments are mainly playing in the low-mid to mid-mids, since speakers don't output these ranges as much as the highs, there will be relatively little musical, tonal instruments coming through and mainly hatt-y and percussion stuff.

What may help is just already changing the composition and/or arrangement and/or sounds a bit. Maybe adding harmonics to one or more sounds. Also, often eqing helps where you can reduce the low-mid, mid-mids in a few instruments but then raise their overall levels so the upper harmonics come out more. Or you could EQ and boost the highs and upper harmonics of a few instruments (together with adding harmonics). Compression also will help here to keep levels in check while gaining  volume.

Next. Often this issue may also be because you have not layered enough or have not added enough instruments. Again, maybe you have, but usually that may mean you mainly added stuff to your lower-mids again and then above solutions may help again. You want to layer sounds a bit (in different frequencies). However, what you also want to do is have a few different rhythms in there. Since not everything plays at the same time the mix will sound fuller and busier because of that (you can have slow sustain chords, and then an arp and then some percussion doing even something else). Again, have te rhythms work together and don't have too much rhythms to keep from making the mix muddy. Also, per usual, short transient kind of sounds (and especially atonal stuff that's also high-end focused) like percussion and whatever are easy and non-mud-inducing ways to fill a mix because as I've said a few times, because they are short they don't add much to the mix (especially atonal stuff). Of course, some quieter background pads also help pad the mix and some well^-timed fx and sound candy makes the mix sound more and alvie and also full without muddying it up.

*Also, in case of percussion and all that stuff, they are naturally living more in the high-end so you get the benefit of filling the high-end but also simply adding stuff in the frequency ranges where there is more room.*

Like, the main thing here is just to be careful with your 200-500 (maybe even 1k sometimes) range. Don't try to add too much stuff (for too long at least) there and if you do try to not have them overlap too much. Eq them also well, especially in this range you'll probably want to be passing, cutting a whole lot and then from 2-5k you want to start to be boosting and stuff. Like, there is a lot you can do to make a mix sound (and be perceived) filled without muddying it up. For example, having a loud vocal is also very common to fill stuff up as the loud vocal already fills up the mix quite good and not much to be mixed since everything else is much quieter (but again compressed and eqed well to be still audible and supportive).

So yeah, EQ well (be careful of the lower ranges, boost higher range), add background elements, different rhythms (eq those well too), add atonal high-end stuff and short transient stuff for filling mix. Just take care of your mix as they are really the brigde between high and low. Without adequate mids the low-end may sound too quiet (even though it's actually just mids missing) or the high may sound too loud (but again mids missing so the only reference we have is low-end which naturally we don't hear as loud, especially not on speakers).
