## How to properly cut through and sit back elements
So this article is mainly about how to cut through and sit back elements (and why you should) it's not really talking much about the supporting elements, though it will kind of get clear either way for that too.

Anyway, let's start with an examples. When you're making a song, a lot of times, you may start with kick which, to your ears, sounds fine. However, the more and more elements you add to the mix the more the kick starts to drown. A kick that was perfectly fine now has completely drowned. Now, first of all there may be some mix issues. There may be that some elements are too loud and some elements need to have their lows cut for keeping the kick breathing (or maybe you need some more sidechaining). Maybe the kick and bass need to be mixed well. However, let's assume that the mix is decent and not per se the issue and everything is balanced well.

Now, the first thing you could do is simply turn up the the kick and this may be the thing that fixes it (a bit), however, often you'll notice you'll have to turn up the kick quite loud to get it noticed as much as you'd like or want. However, turning it back down to reasonable levels and your kick is yet again drowning in the mix. How does this come? You clearly see the kick peaking at maybe even louder than all the rest, yet it doesn't cut through.

Well, this is a common issue and it mainly happens because you don't have enough high frequency. You see, in a kick, the bottom-end boom (though not too boomy depending in genre is important for giving the song a strong foundation but the high-end is what makes it noticeable and cut through the mix. This is especially true when you listen to your song on laptop speakers where the bottom-end is already less so it's extra important to have that low-mid and/or low-high click in there too. Because **high frequencies + transient** is what makes a sound mainly noticeable, whether it is on headphones or speakers or just generally talking about in your mix.

*Intermezzo: Of course volume also helps make stuff cut through but you can have quiet stuff still sort of be noticeable or "cut through" thanks to the transient click, which usually is a short high energy high and loud frequency anyway. Like, if you have an element in the background but you still want it to be heard add (more) transient and/or highs.*

So with the example of the kick you have a few options. Either you choose a sample that has more transient in and highs in it, whilst making sure your kick keeps the body (if needed and wanted in your song). Or, if you like the body of your kick, choose and layer a clicky kick, mix them well together (especially high-pass out the low-end of the clicky kick) and together you now have a kick that has both nice low-end and/or high-end. Or your may simply solve the issue by boosting the highs on your kick and/or perhaps boosting the areas where the klick and transient happens. Or, a transient shaper could help. Either way, there are multiple ways of coming to pretty much the same thing and all these are not mutually exclusive.

*Intermezzo: Note that to be able to boost and have noticeable highs you may need to saturate and/or OTT to add high-end information. You may find that even with just saturation and/or OTT it now cuts through enough. And else, if not you may then just proceed to boost this extra content now. Because you cannot boost what isn't there in the first place and if there is just a little bit, it will boost these few frequencies so loud only those few are really loud and overpowering. Same with leads and or chords if they need to cut through more, you may want to OTT and/or saturate them and see from there. If they already have enough highs perhaps only boosting will work.*

This principle also goes for other elements you want to cut through the mix. For example, a lead is often one you also want to cut through. So again, you might find yourself turning up the volume of your lead way too much and by doing that you also boost the lows in the lead muddying up the low-end of the mix. So again, you high pass the lead so you can boost the lead in volume without muddying up the sub range where it has no business anyway. And then if you still find yourself having to boost too much in volume you may need to boost the highs and/or saturate/OTT the leads or whatever you want to cut through (and again add transient shaper or layer for more cutting through). Again, you really want and need this. Even if you don't notice it in your headphones, laptop listeners will thank you.

*Intermezzo: Kick is more important to cut through than bass usually. Like, low-end is hard on laptop speakers anyway and you don't want bass overpowering. You could have a top bass that has some low-mids to high-mids but no need to add highs to make the bass super noticeable. It's ok, the drum is there (and needs to be there) for the main beat and you got your chords and leads and stuff and so usually the point of song gets to come accross even on low low-end speakers. The bass is usually mainly there to provide the low-end, that it's function, not to be noticed so if a system can't output low-end, so be it. Like also, due to the nature of low vs. high frequencies low frequencies are hard to notice anyway and already need to be way louder than highs to be noticed so you'd overpower your mix trying to make your bass noticed on laptop speakers. Either way, all this depends from mix to mix and genre to genre.*






is already at a decent volume, yet doesn't cut through at all. This is then because your kick has a decent amount of lows which is good but not enough highs. So what you'll then notice is that turning up will make the kick overpower the low-end whilst still not cutting through (only if you turn it up real loud in which case the mix balance is completely off). Here it thus is a matter of increasing the high frequencies rather than all frequencies (i.e. volume balancing). You can do this in two ways (and both aren't mutually exclusive). Either you boost a bit of the highs and see if that solves the problem. Or, you layer a transient-heavy kick with it (of course mixing it well with the other kick). In this way the volume will still increase of your total kick but not this much and also this time it's caused byadditional high frequencies. In other words, we can now turn down the total kick in volume to the original volume (or one that feels good) and notice it cutting through.
Noticeable usually means significant amount of high frequencies (and transients). 


Now, the opposite is also true. Sometimes you DO want elements to be noticeable. A kick, in many genres and songs, is a prime example for this. Now, again, to make your kick more noticeable you could turn up the volume and it may be solved. Or maybe instruments (also) need to be EQ'ed out in the lows more too or some need to be turned down. Again it depends.

*Intermezzo: Noticeable usually means having more highs (and transients) as highs are more noticed than lows by the ear (especially the highest).*

However, a lot of times, you'll find that your kick is already at a decent volume, yet doesn't cut through at all. This is then because your kick has a decent amount of lows which is good but not enough highs. So what you'll then notice is that turning up will make the kick overpower the low-end whilst still not cutting through (only if you turn it up real loud in which case the mix balance is completely off). Here it thus is a matter of increasing the high frequencies rather than all frequencies (i.e. volume balancing). You can do this in two ways (and both aren't mutually exclusive). Either you boost a bit of the highs and see if that solves the problem. Or, you layer a transient-heavy kick with it (of course mixing it well with the other kick). In this way the volume will still increase of your total kick but not this much and also this time it's caused byadditional high frequencies. In other words, we can now turn down the total kick in volume to the original volume (or one that feels good) and notice it cutting through.

This technique is also applicable to leads or chords. A lead you usually want to be noticed (especially in chorus and/or buys mix) so if you find that you need to turn up your lead too much in volume to be noticed it may just be an issue that the highs aren't prevalent enough (assuming your other parts are decently balanced and eq'ed). In that case EQ boosting a nice high frequency range may help.

Now, note that of course high frequencies need to exist too so this is where stuff like OTT, saturation, transient processors can help since boosting only a few highs will not help (or make those few frequencies too much). Layering also will help of course to add the highs it needs (like an octave layer or whatever).



and noticeably cut through the mix You may want your bass to not cut through too much but still provide low-end, however, in many genres you do want your kick to cut through.

Lastly, as with everything it's a spectrum. You don't have to make your bass a full sub bass so it doesn't interfere with the highs at all, in your genre or song you may want to push the limit of having your bass noticed (and a bit fat/thick) whilst still having it out of the way of the music. Or maybe you just want a tad of harmonics just to not make the bass super sterile and thin.


Volume balance is and should be the first step in mixing instruments. However, often you'll find yourself that something isn't cutting through the mix even though it is already at a decent volume. A great example of this is with a kick (or snare). On its own it may be fine but played with other sounds it may get drowned in the mix. Now of course this could just mean that you need to EQ and balance your other sounds and/or EQ and volume balance your kick to solve it but often you might find yourself in a situation where the volume of the kick is quite loud already so turnining it up doesn't make sense. In this case it's often because the kick has a loud bottom end (which is good) so turning it up would just get overpowering in the bottom-end whilst still not cutting through (it may only cut through if you heavily increase the loudness of the kick in which case it just overpowers the whole mix and sounds quite bad). You can hear this especially on laptop speakers which inherently have less low-end.

Same for chord stacks if you find yourself having to turn up too much to be noticed you may just need to boost freqs and/or add a (bright) layer. Like if u add a dull layer again there is no point.
