[Home](../index.md)

# Practical tonal balance and mixing advance
## Table of contents
1. [Introduction](#introduction)
2. [Common tonal balance configurations](common-tonal-balance-configurations)

## Mixing rant
In this article I go over some tips to help achieving tonal balance (but also the tonal balance you want).

Once you start getting how mixing works, it's not that hard as it really is always a bit the same decisions you have to make depending on the sound and its role in the mix.

For example, to have a good tonal balance and a good frequency content is easy once you know the compositional tropes and what each frequency band gives you. For example, a sub bass and then + kick already immediately give you a stable foundation to build and the rest above it can build on it. The low-mids are probably the least important frequencies but they are important for warmth but simply mud up very quickly.

Either way, the thing is, you can already have a kick and then you can have a sub bass and voila. Nice foundation. And then, of course, in practically all genres kick is really thing the thing that drives the beat and rhythm so, regardless of the kick its body or tail or whatever, you want it to cut through the mix and you want it to be audible on laptop speakers and stuff with less low-end. This means it needs to have a sufficient transient (as a kick is basically a transient) and it needs to have sufficient high-end (in which also the transient lies too).

And then with your kick or snae if you want more boominess, sure perhaps you can try and compress to see if that brings out the boom but usually it's better to find a more boomy kick sample in that case. Like just try to make your kick fit in mix and you'll be nice.

Again, have your basic drum loop and your SPAN and let's assume you have a basic drums + chords + lead + bass thing going on. Do you see the low-end where the kick is be quiet loud already while it actually doesn't cut through? Especially if you lower the volume and/or listen on less low-end speakers? Bingo! That kick needs more highs and/or transients. Common things to solve is transient processor, saturation, OTT boosting highs a bit (or a combination of all or some). Then you have to check a bit with the bass. Again, usually you want your bass less important than kick so you have to balance both so that the volume between the two is so that both are good in volume and the low-end isn't poking out in SPAN too much (again, usually the sub range pokes out a bit in comparision to the low-mids, but depends on genre, but usually it's always at least a little bit).

Same with hihats, they are high-end, look on the spectrum. They are not poking out? Well it's high end so they should be audible quiet easily so probably it's because volume is too low or perhaps you need to OTT them a bit and/or saturate them a bit so there is more brightness there. And again, check in your span whether they are poking out or too low. Usually a bit higher than the sub (or even depending on whatever).

Then the snare is the same thing. It depends a bit on whether it hits with the kick (in which case it doesn't need as snap of a transient and also not as much bottom end. But again, if snare gets lost in mix then do the same diagnosis as kick. Also, again, look in SPAN and see how much high-end and how the high-end comes, you may need to OTT (or MB compress) and or transient shape that thing, especially if standalone snare as it's a bit of a secondary rhythmic element.

And then with the kick snare and hats (and other perc) you usually already have a very good framework for tonal balance and a good open mix. Usually your kick proves bottom and a bit of highs, the snare has a lot of highs when it comes in, the the hats provide the more sustained highs and stuff like that and then we have our more melodic elements in the mids and high-mids providing the bridge and our bass to support a bit more in the low-end and have it be more melodic as well as adding to the warmth.

And then siedchain if needed especially in heavy bass genres and stuff where everthing is though sidechain to kick and/or snare if you need that extra clearance.

Other thing is with the sub bass. Like yes you have a nice foundation but again, very hard to hear on high-end favored speakers so you might need to saturate and/or OTT a bit. How much depends on how noticeable it needs to be. Usually you don't do too much but then you add a mid bass which is identical to the sub. This way the sub can be recongized thanks to he harmonics in the mid bass but you don't want that mid bass too loud to not mud up the low-mids and also you don't need absolute high-end for stuff to be recognized. Unlike the kick and snare, bass doesn't need to be (unless heavy bass genre) crystal clear and recongized so having a bit of low-mids presence and then fading out to 1-2k Hz range is acceptable depends a bit on the genre and the mix.

Then, your main instruments will be written in the mids to low-highs usually. So most fundamentals may reside there (though you may occasionally have some pure high-end textures). The thing is, this will very often mud up the low-mids easily and especially for brighter mixes this is bad so you do want to mix it well Again, you can layer all you want you can add textures and stuff, all stuff that is musical. This usually means OTT'ing a lot of stuff and/or turning down/shelving the low-mids around 75-350Hz. Again, you don't want to fully high pass (unless it's around 75-100Hz) but you want to low shelf so stuff gets turned down but you still keep the warmth there. This takes a bit of mixing and stuff like that.

Then there may be a lead or a vocal or whatever and those also usually reside in mids for most but again, especially those are bright shimmery and loud usually and very present in the highs so those really add to those high energies a lot usually.

So yeah having the basic composition tropes in place will help your mix sound open and full already and then doing the basic above mixing technniques should give you a bright mix. Again, always reference to others and always reference to SPAN and see whether stuff is too much or too little.

Then for a full mix, you also need to utilze reverb and delay, without it your instruments are going to feel empty and a bit dry and your mix won't sound full. It's that shimmer of that reverb on a lot of instruments that really does it. Now, you usually want to start with just reverb (or subtle delay added) and see how that works. The sparse the mix or section the more reverb you'd usually want on your instruments (except for perhaps your low-end kick bass and stuff). Like this really gives a dimensions to your stuff. Like also adding it on that snare and having a nice reverb tail is really nice. So yeah definitely don't shy away from it but again, especially in a busy mix you have to choose the elements which have reverb or less or more of it (so definitely tweak the presets because those are usually too much).

Then there is also stereo space. You might want to add some extra unsion and or stereo layers stuff to make some things more wide and things and to get out of the way of the other stuff like more mono centered things will give mix a bit more nice space and dimension.

Also to go back to the tonal balance. So your drums usually add the nice framework and then you have instruments filling up the rest. Again, the fullness of a mix really comes from the nice stable sub-end and then having stuff going on above like transients (like percussion) some nice things coming in and coming out and stuff like that. Like, you can't make stuff full with a loud supersaw chord stack. I mean, you can but a saw is super rich in harmonics, a supersaw chord stack is definitely even richer in so many harmonics so having that loud will seriously be very harsh on the ears. So again, instead try a pad, a more rounded texture for that high-end shimmer and use the supersaws either as a transient stab or if sustained stab not too long sustained and/or not too much in high-end, som reverb for push back and space perhaps some stereo width to get out of the way and perhaps some chord clean up too.

Also in low-mids can get crowded soon cuz chords lots of harmonics so thats why u want to have like octaves and fifths only to leave enough space and also not beat too much though you also can have extensions there but again then you'll have to lower and/or shelf the sound and/or OTT and so on.

But yeah the fullness just comes from that reverb space creation and then that nice sub thing and the opness of the composition trope hats and snare and then maybe some stuff in the middle but yeah. And just a few textures and shit. You really don't need to have layer or a shitton of them, you just need the basic composition tropes and mix them well and then you good.

Also all this shit doesn't mean you can't add a lot. No it depends like a vocal chop just add it like it's not gonna be the thing to peak the meters again in the highs it's lead and the claps and the hats and stuff like. Add that extra layer too, again just mix it well and don' tbe too too loud ands stuff. Like you can add a shitton but just adhere to the principles. 

Also, it matters way more to be musical rather than filling a spectrum. again keep mixing tropes and compositoinal tropes in mind like how to sound full and open but for the rest seriously just compose and make music. **Composition and sounds and complementary sounds/composition** is way more important for a good song and should be focus, don't think at all about filling frequneices.

Seriously, musicallity (composition and what sounds you choose/design and how they complement) is way more important than trying to fill a spectrum. Know and realize that you will be able to fill the spectrum and get the tonal balance by simply following compositional tropes (like the kick and snare having high-end, hats and/or claps playing, having sub in the sub and kick in the sub and then all the rest in the middle and by correct mixing no matter kind of song you make. Just know what musical tropes make stuff open and what aren't and what you can use and how to use them. But again, stereo widening and nice panning and musicallity and mixing correctly (mainly volume eq, reverb) are seriously the three elements to make a good mix rather than trying to fill a specturm. Just realize that having a harsh supersaw loud may fill the spectrum but it's not musical and harsh and realize stuff like pads and what not and more transients can help fill stuff up more without being harsh and stuff.

## Common tonal balance configurations
The tonal balance may be the reason (or one of) why your song doesn't sound as good or as similar as your references. That's why referencing the tonal balanace and seeing it through a spectrum analyzer how it looks and comparing it with yours (assuming you compare it in the same section and genre and similar vibe) is very important. However, there are definitely some tendencies that we can deduce.

### On the (very) bright side
In modern (hard-hitting) EDM, you'll notice that the songs are **very bright**. If you use the tonal balance control 2 plugin you'll notice that usually the highs and very highs are both at the top (sometimes even slightly over) of what would be technically allowed. If you look through SPAN you will see a curve that basically goes up the higher in frequency we go. Other things we see on SPAN is that there is that the (sub) bass and kick area are more turned up then the 200-500Hz range. Not that that range isn't there, the > 200Hz area is just more pronounced and thus this prevents from clear bass and less mud. Also, the highs may take a bit of a leap from the mids in representation (or may not) and the very highs, at the tippy top may start to come down again, possibly rolling of some ear-pain.

Either way, the genre is very bright and you achieve that through various thing. One key thing to realize, though, is that volume balancing plays less of a role than mixing fx to achieve it. What I mean by that is that you usually have your, let's say, supersaw chord stacks to be hitting between high C3 and high C5. This is mids to high-mids so the fundamentals aren't all super-duper bright. But that's okay because we *need* that mid energy and warmth as well. If we were to have chords only starting from C5 up until C7, sure it would sound bright but where is the warmth and body, there is nothing down there. Instead, we put them down low and now we have a bunch of harmonics in the highs and very highs anyway to work with. This is where we don't want our chords to be too loud in volume (want to keep mids at bay) but we want them to be brighter. So, what we can utilize is stuff like OTT MB compression EQ boosts, saturation to actually achieve this. What we get is our mids staying the same volume but our high harmonics being way brighter resulting in the EDM vibe we want. Now whether you need all these fx and how much depends per track and genre and also, small moves on a lot of tracks are a big total move (e.g. don't 100% OTT all tracks, make them all like 25%-ish or whatever). 

Also, look and band reference and see what usually contributes to the highs and very highs naturally. Again, the boosting and saturation and stuff is one thing but for exaple stuff like a hard hitting snare (layered with claps for extra high-end), open/closed hihats, percussion, rides, and/or cymbals are all typically things that are there so having plenty of those and loud enough helps a tremendous amount of brightening up your mix. Again reference the bands (and the songs itself on what they utilize).

Also, don't try to artificially get a lot of loudness it may depend on mix or style. Like if you don't have a lot of basses (dubstep) and/or supersaws, the curve to the highs may be less steep. And also, even if you have those, don't try to like super boost all your stuff too much in the mix. In the end, on the master an often done trick is to soft clip, OTT, and or do the +1db shelf in lows and -1db on the highs shelf trick (and the EQ curve that favors highs), so if needed you can squeeze out a bit more highs like that (but don't overdo it, again, reference).

Do make sure that your highs aren't ear piercing so you'll still want to be a bit careful with your saws (or at least have some pauses between your saw stabs and such) and just general things that play up there. Like, brightness doesn't mean you shouldn't roll off your saws or other things anymore but depending on role genre and such you'll have to. Either way, you'll have to treate your high-end, even for a bright mix, you don't want stuff to be ear-piercing, especially the rather high regions, like you want to make sure that in your highs stuff is harmonious. So yeah, sometimes rather than boosting current harmonix, you might just need also a bit of saturation and/or OTT to add more harmonics for more presence.
